Title: KREX: Concurrent Kernel Benchmarking on Shared GPUs via Region-Granular Exclusivity

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.30057v1

Published Time: Fri, 25 Sep 2026 01:43:10 GMT

Number of Pages: 14

Markdown Content:
# KREX: Concurrent Kernel Benchmarking on Shared GPUs via Region-Granular Exclusivity 

## Tianyu Feng ∗

HKUST Hong Kong SAR, China 

## Haoxuan Yu ∗

HKUST Hong Kong SAR, China 

## Tianyuan Wu 

HKUST Hong Kong SAR, China 

## Lingyun Yang 

Alibaba Group China 

## Daocheng Ying 

Alibaba Group China 

## Yuxiao Wang 

Alibaba Group China 

## Ruibo Fan 

Alibaba Group China 

## Yinghao Yu 

Alibaba Group China 

## Guodong Yang 

Alibaba Group China 

## Liping Zhang 

Alibaba Group China 

## Wei Wang 

HKUST Hong Kong SAR, China 

## Abstract 

LLM agents automate GPU kernel optimization by repeat-edly composing candidates and measuring their duration on real GPUs. Existing systems preserve measurement fidelity by reserving a GPU for an entire agent session or bench-marking command. However, this results in poor utilization because only a small fraction of command execution requires exclusive GPU access. Sharing GPUs could recover this idle capacity, but introduces contention that compromises mea-surement fidelity and misdirects the agent’s search. We present KREX, a runtime for concurrent kernel agent benchmarking with region-granular exclusivity . KREX lets agents mark critical regions involving timing-sensitive oper-ations within a benchmarking command. The runtime then enforces exclusivity within marked regions and allows con-current execution outside them, achieving high throughput while preserving measurement fidelity. To enforce in-region exclusivity , KREX blocks new competing GPU submissions and drains outstanding work before freezing sibling pro-cesses and isolating CPU cores, protecting both GPU exe-cution and the host threads that drive measurements. To maximize off-region concurrency , KREX reuses GPU contexts in persistent context processes to avoid repeated, node-wide serialized context creation. We evaluate KREX on NVIDIA and AMD GPUs. Compared with command-granular exclu-sivity baselines, KREX delivers up to 3 .4× the benchmarking throughput with a negligible p95 timing inflation of 0 .30%, 1.58%, and 3 .90% for kernels longer than 10 ms, 1 ms, and 0.1 ms, respectively. 

## 1 Introduction 

Optimizing GPU kernels can significantly reduce the end-to-end computational cost of modern AI workloads [12, 21, 25], but it requires extensive expert knowledge and repeated cy-cles of profiling and search, and the effort recurs with every hardware generation [1, 41]. Kernel agents automate this 

> ∗Tianyu Feng and Haoxuan Yu contributed equally to this work.

loop, generating implementations that rival, or even surpass, hand-written kernels [11, 32, 44]. Industry now trains, bench-marks, and deploys kernel agents at scale [37, 40], as reported by Meta [26], Google [32], and public leaderboards [55]. An agent improves a kernel by measuring it, so training, validat-ing, and using these agents all reduce to running candidate kernels on real GPUs. In our production environment, users submit over 300,000 of these kernel benchmarking jobs daily across six GPU models from three vendors, making kernel benchmarking a significant and growing GPU workload. To measure the performance of a candidate kernel, a benchmarking command is launched to produce a timing result. Under the hood, it imports the frameworks the kernel needs, compiles the kernel, generates inputs and checks the result against a reference, and only then times the kernel in a timing loop. These phases make different demands on the device. Imports and compilation do not touch the GPU, and input generation and correctness checking produce a value rather than a timing. Only the timing loop produces a measured kernel duration, which is the agent’s optimization objective. To ensure the measurement is faithful, kernel benchmarking systems run candidates on GPUs they reserve 

exclusively , without any interference from other workloads. However, exclusive device reservation results in low uti-lization. In our production platform, queued kernel bench-marking requests alone demand 4.8 × the online GPU capac-ity during peak hours, yet the GPUs that are allocated remain idle for the majority of their allocation time. Existing systems grant benchmarking exclusivity at two granularities, both far coarser than the timing loop. E1 : session-granular exclu-sivity reserves a GPU for the entire duration of an agent’s session. We profiled a representative kernel agent [2, 51] over a complete session and measured a GPU utilization rate of just 3.4%. GPU commands occupy only 19.3% of the session’s total wall-clock time, and even within those com-mands, GPU activities are sparse, accounting for only 17.4% of the execution time on average; the rest of the session is LLM reasoning and other activities that use no GPU. E2 :arXiv:2609.30057v1 [cs.DC] 24 Sep 2026 Feng et al. 74% 8% 10% 8% no GPU needs the GPU exclusively      

> GPU
> clients 3 complete
> 02468time on one shared GPU (s)
> GPU
> clients 14 complete
> (a) kernel benchmark command time breakdown (b) E2: command exclusivity (c) E3: region exclusivity
> start-up JIT compile correctness
> benchmark (exclusive) queued

Figure 1. Granularity determines what exclusivity costs. (a) 

Execution time breakdown of a GEMM kernel benchmark-ing command. Only the timed loop needs the GPU exclu-sively. (b) E2: whole candidate kernels hold the device. (c) 

E3 (KREX): only timed regions hold it exclusively. 

command-granular exclusivity reserves the GPU only while a command is running, so multiple agent sessions share a GPU on demand. Public leaderboards and internal deployments work this way [26, 55]. While it results in better utilization than E1 , the reservation remains much coarser than the work it serves. In a run of eight agents contending for one GPU, the device was held for 82% of a nine-second window but spent only 7% of that window executing the timed regions (Figure 1b), because the timed loop accounts for just 8.5% of a command’s total duration (Figure 1a). One remedy for the low utilization is to let multiple com-mands share a GPU. However, existing GPU-sharing mech-anisms such as MPS, MIG, and time-slicing [33, 34] can-not be adopted directly. These mechanisms are designed for throughput and isolation, but not for performance fidelity, as they either perturb the timing loop’s measurements or, in the case of MIG, alter the hardware under test (§2.2). We argue that the conflict between utilization and fidelity is an artifact of granularity. A command’s reported kernel duration is sensitive to contention only within small, identifi-able regions , which in practice correspond to its timing loop; the rest of the command needs no exclusive access. This motivates a finer level of exclusivity, E3 : region-granular exclusivity , which makes the device exclusive inside a criti-cal region and shared elsewhere (Figure 1c), achieving high utilization while preserving measurement fidelity. In this paper, we present KREX, a runtime for concur-rent kernel benchmarking with region-granular exclusivity. KREX exposes a simple client API that lets the agent mark a critical region with a single line of code, while leaving the kernel code and benchmarking scaffold unchanged. It then uses two mechanisms to achieve measurement fidelity and high utilization: 

In-region exclusivity. Once the region is identified by an agent, in-region exclusivity must be enforced despite other tenants’ ongoing work, including asynchronous GPU tasks already queued on the device. Not only must this in-flight GPU work be excluded, but so must the tenants’ host threads: for multi-kernel implementations, the CPU operations feed-ing the GPU can themselves sit on the critical path, making host-side contention an equally potent source of interfer-ence. A critical region therefore has to own two resources at once, the device and the host side that drives it. To achieve this, KREX employs a series of cooperative GPU- and CPU-side exclusivity mechanisms. Upon entering a region, KREX drains the in-flight GPU work with a protocol that leaves nothing submitted on the device, freezes other tenants’ host-side process trees, and then executes the candidate kernel, along with its GPU context, on cores reserved within that GPU’s CPU slice , a fixed partition of the host’s cores. 

Off-region concurrency. Work outside a critical region has no exclusivity requirement and should run at the highest possible concurrency to maximize throughput. In practice, however, that concurrency is limited by GPU initialization and context creation, which acquire a driver-level lock that blocks concurrent operations on all GPUs in the node; in our testbed these operations take hundreds of milliseconds for each command. To eliminate this recurring cost, KREX main-tains a pool of pre-allocated, persistent contexts, each held by a long-lived context process , and reuses them instead of cre-ating one per command. KREX interposes on the driver API and forwards a command’s calls to its assigned context pro-cess. These calls are submitted asynchronously, overlapping call forwarding with GPU execution to hide the added IPC overhead. Per-command cleanup and fault recovery maintain isolation between commands. We evaluate KREX by replaying over 20,000 benchmark-ing commands collected from three kernel agents running on three benchmark suites, using a four-node testbed with 16 NVIDIA H20 and 16 AMD MI308X GPUs. Compared with command-granular exclusivity, KREX delivers 3 .4× and 2 .6×

the benchmarking throughput on H20 and MI308X, respec-tively, while keeping p95 timing inflation at 0 .30%, 1 .58%, and 3.90% for kernels longer than 10, 1, and 0.1 ms, respectively. A candidate-ranking experiment on H20 shows that KREX keeps ranking-flip rates within three percentage points of an uncontended repeat, preserving the relative performance signals that guide the agent’s search. 

## 2 Background and Motivation 

2.1 Kernel Agent and Benchmarking Kernel agent. Kernel agents generate candidate kernels and evaluate them based on measured kernel duration, which KREX 

guides their search for better-performing implementations. These kernels are often benchmarked in Python environ-ments, such as PyTorch, where the reference implemen-tation and input tensors already reside [38, 55]. A typical benchmarking command imports the required frameworks, compiles the candidate kernel, generates inputs and checks correctness against the reference, and finally times the ker-nel. Timing follows standard practices: benchmarking har-nesses execute warm-up launches, followed by repeated timed launches, and summarize the results with a statis-tic such as the median, often flushing the L2 cache between iterations. 

Benchmarking command. The phases of a benchmark-ing command differ in whether they need the device at all, and in whether they need it to themselves. Framework im-ports and kernel compilation do not involve the GPU. Input generation and correctness checks utilize the GPU but do not require exclusive access: colocated workloads may delay their completions, but do not change the tensors they gener-ate or the verdict they return. Only the timing phase requires 

exclusive hardware access , as its output directly determines the kernel-duration metric the agent optimizes. Compared to other phases, the timing phase is often a small fraction of the command that contains it. In a repre-sentative kernel agent workload on our testbed, start-up and compilation account for 81% of a command’s median dura-tion, the correctness check for 10%, and the timed loop for only 8.5%, or 0.22 s out of a 2.6 s command (Figure 1a). 

2.2 Why Current Approaches Fail Reservation harms utilization. Existing systems protect measurement fidelity by reserving each GPU at one of two granularities. E1 : session-granular exclusivity holds a GPU for an agent’s entire session. In one profiled session of a rep-resentative kernel agent [2], GPU commands occupy 19.3% of wall-clock time, and the device is active for only 17.4% of that interval, yielding 3.4% utilization. LLM reasoning and other non-GPU work fill the remainder. E2 : command-granular exclusivity holds the GPU only while each benchmarking command runs, as public leaderboards and internal deploy-ments do [26, 55]. This removes the session-wide reservation but still holds the device for the entire command, although only the timing phase requires exclusivity, which accounts for a small fraction of the command time (§2.1). Command-granular exclusivity also results in a recurring GPU setup cost upon command start. Each command runs in a fresh process, initializes the GPU and creates its own context inside the reservation. These operations acquire a driver-level lock that blocks operations on every GPU in the node, so only one command can perform them at a time; each costs hundreds of milliseconds. In our experiments, creating 64 CUDA contexts on one server takes more than 30 seconds even when the requests are issued concurrently 0 5 10 15 20 duration (ms) 1-37 1-54 1-61 1-81 KernelBench  3.2x 1.9x 1.8x 1.5x exclusive picks A shared picks C    

> 49 54 duration (μs)
> A
> AC
> Cblocked context create GPU command
> (a) time inflation (b) rank flips (c) serial startup

Figure 2. (a) GPU sharing inflates measurements. (b) Con-tention distorts ranks. (c) Node-wide serialization caused by context creation. across different GPUs. Command admission therefore se-rializes node-wide; as commands shorten, waiting to start consumes a larger share of each reservation (Figure 2c). 

Sharing compromises fidelity. One way to improve GPU utilization is to time-multiplex commands [33], but unpro-tected sharing compromises measurement fidelity. Concur-rent agents interleave kernels on the same GPU, so con-tention makes measured kernel duration depend on colo-cated workloads rather than the kernel alone. Figure 2a shows the effect: replaying the same benchmark commands with eight per GPU and no protection inflates their reported kernel durations to 1 .5×–3 .2× those measured alone. As such load-dependent distortion introduced by contention tends to inflate measured kernel duration, repeating measurements under contention does not by itself recover uncontended kernel duration. Moreover, since the distortion varies with colocated workloads, it cannot be reliably canceled in candi-date comparisons. Kernel agents are especially vulnerable because they rank candidates by relative performance. In one trajectory, an agent optimizing an MoE token-alignment kernel produced several candidates within a few percent of one another (Fig-ure 2b). Without contention, its best candidate took 49.0 𝜇 s, 2.6% less time than its closest rival at 50.3 𝜇 s. Under unpro-tected sharing with 64 agents, their ranking reversed: the best candidate measured 53.9 𝜇 s versus the rival’s 49.3 𝜇 s, so an agent reading those numbers keeps the slower kernel. As shown in Figure 2b, sharing reversed six of the ten pair-wise rankings among these candidates, whereas a second uncontended run reproduced the original ordering. 

2.3 Region-Granular Exclusivity Region-granular exclusivity. Existing approaches make exclusivity all-or-nothing at command granularity: reserve the whole command or share all of it. Yet only the timing phase of a command is sensitive to contention (§2.1). Con-fining exclusivity to the timing phase is therefore sufficient 

for fidelity, since the reported kernel duration depends on nothing that happens outside it. Doing so is also cheap , as the timing phase usually occupies only a small fraction of a command (§2.1). Formally, we call the marked span of a Feng et al. region marking a           

> kernel agents use case 1: agent marks
> complete program
> with :
> setup() region.critical() t = bench_mine()
> use case 2: fixed code marks
> kernel only
> def fused(x): ... x, ref = make_inputs() k = load( fused )
> check(k, ref, x, tol) for f in (k, ref): with region.critical() :
> t = do_bench(f, x)
> GPU 0 admit, release GPU 5 calls, replies node GPU0 GPU1 dispatcher agent-written fixed code command client process state: in-region paused off-region
> off-region concurrency ccoordinator context context context context context context context context coordinator
> in-region exclusivity bGPU5 GPU6 GPU7 GPU 4
> CPUs GPU2 GPU3

Figure 3. Overview of KREX, shown with eight GPUs and four concurrent commands per GPU for illustration. command that must run alone a critical region , and enforc-ing exclusivity over that span region-granular exclusivity 

(E3 ). E3 preserves the protected measurement interval of E1 

and E2 while leaving the rest of the command available to concurrent execution (off-region concurrency). 

Efficiency challenge. To fully exploit off-region concur-rency, the system must ensure that enough kernel candi-dates become GPU resident quickly. Under the existing per-command process model, however, each command first ini-tializes the GPU and creates a context. These operations acquire a driver-level lock shared across every GPU in the node, so commands initialize one at a time even when they target different GPUs: while one command creates its con-text, the others wait on assigned but idle GPUs (Figure 2c). Command admission therefore remains serialized, signifi-cantly limiting off-region concurrency. 

Requirements. Building an efficient system that imple-ments region-granular exclusivity for concurrent and faithful kernel benchmarking has four requirements: 

• R1 (boundary). The system should provide a simple interface for the agent or scaffold author to mark the com-plete region without modifying the kernel under test, and enforce the supplied boundary throughout the command. 

• R2 (fidelity). The system should keep reported timings close to uncontended runs and limit distortion of candi-date rankings. 

• R3 (throughput). The service must keep multiple com-mands resident per GPU and overlap their off-region work without allowing node-wide GPU initialization and con-text creation to serialize admission. 

• R4 (heterogeneity). The same region interface and isola-tion contract must hold on diverse hardware, specifically NVIDIA and AMD GPUs, even when their enforcement mechanisms differ. 

## 3 System Overview 

KREX is a multi-tenant runtime for concurrent kernel agent benchmarking that provides region-granular exclusivity. It accepts commands whose programs contain explicitly marked critical regions. During these regions, the runtime protects GPU execution and CPU cores from competing tenants. When no command on a GPU is executing a marked region, the runtime allows commands on that GPU to execute concurrently. Users only mark the code that needs exclusivity while the runtime manages resource allocation and coordinates exclusive access. 

Workflow. Figure 3 follows a command from region mark-ing to execution. Regions are marked before command sub-mission in one of two ways (Figure 3a). In the agent-marked 

case, the agent writes the complete program, including the benchmarking script, and marks its regions. In the scaffold-marked case, the agent supplies only the kernel; the scaffold author marks the regions in a fixed benchmarking script that the agent cannot modify. Each command runs in a client process , and the dispatcher 

pairs it with an available context process from the pool. The client executes the candidate program and forwards its GPU calls to the context process, which holds the GPU context and submits those calls to the driver. The context process persists across commands, allowing its GPU context to be 

reused rather than recreated for each command. When a command enters a region, KREX first blocks new GPU submissions from other tenants on that GPU, then drains their outstanding GPU work, and finally freezes their process trees (Figure 3b). Physical CPU cores are partitioned into disjoint per-GPU slices throughout execution, prevent-ing tenants on different GPUs from competing for the same cores. Within a slice, the measuring command’s submitting threads are pinned to reserved cores before timing. On re-gion exit, the runtime thaws the other tenants and reopens submissions, allowing them to resume execution. Concur-rent execution is allowed when no command on a GPU is in KREX 

a region (Figure 3c). Context reuse sustains this concurrency by avoiding repeated, serialized GPU context creation (§2.2). These mechanisms address the requirements in §2.3 as follows. R1 (boundary): Region marking lets agents and scaf-fold authors express measurement boundaries through a one-line API (§4.1). R2 (fidelity): In-region exclusivity excludes competing GPU work and protects the CPU threads that sub-mit the measurement’s GPU calls (§4.2). R3 (throughput): 

Off-region concurrency overlaps commands outside regions, while the persistent context pool pays context creation costs at startup or recovery rather than on every command (§4.3). 

R4 (heterogeneity): Vendor-specific adaptations implement the shared region protocol on NVIDIA and AMD (§5). 

## 4 Design Mechanisms 

In this section, we describe the design mechanisms in detail, following the roadmap given in §3. 

4.1 Region Marking 

In KREX, critical regions must be marked before command submission. This is done with a simple context manager, 

region.critical() . KREX then establishes exclusivity for the enclosed code at runtime (§4.2). 

Why boundaries cannot be inferred. A region should hold all measurement code and nothing more: too broad, it reserves the GPU for work that tolerates sharing and costs concurrency; too narrow, it leaves measurement code ex-posed to contention and reports a distorted duration. Where that boundary falls differs across commands. Marking only the code between timing calls excludes the warm-up loop, which precedes the timed loop to complete hidden initializa-tions and stabilize cache state; marking every loop to capture the warm-up pulls in correctness checks. Region sizes span orders of magnitude, from a loop that relaunches a single kernel to an entire MoE forward pass of many kernels. Some measurements are implicit in the calling code, as when an au-totuner profiles internally, and never appear as a timed loop. The boundary follows the intended measurement, which the code does not state. 

Why authors supply them. We therefore require explicit region marking given by the code author, rather than infer regions automatically from code that may not capture the au-thor’s measurement intent. Region marks are supplied in two ways (Figure 3a). When an agent writes the complete pro-gram, including both the kernel and the benchmarking script, it also marks the regions. When a fixed benchmarking scaf-fold is used to prevent the agent from modifying the evalua-tion procedure, the agent submits only the generated kernel, and the scaffold author marks the regions in advance. Letting code declare what a lower layer cannot infer is established practice: Linux’s madvise [27] and posix_fadvise [28] pass down access patterns, and applications have long disclosed coordinator holder siblings GPU gate CPU freeze GPU   

> grant 1close 2block calls wait drain 3quiet freeze 4frozen 5time 6thaw 7open 8release resume prepare

Figure 4. Region entry and exit on one GPU. I/O intent to guide prefetching and caching decisions a file system cannot make on its own [6, 39]. Letting agents mark regions also keeps a wrong boundary where it can be repaired. As the boundary reflects the agent’s intended measurement, if the results contradict what the agent expected, it may revise the mark, just as it repairs a kernel it wrote. By contrast, a boundary derived by an external tool is invisible to the agent, which charges the resulting measurement error to its composed kernel and has no mark to correct. In the absence of a reliable analytical method for identifying region boundaries, KREX therefore relies on the author’s marks in this setting. 

4.2 In-Region Exclusivity 

When a tenant enters a region, other tenants may still have GPU work executing or queued, and may continue submit-ting more. The region must exclude both previously submit-ted work and new submissions. Moreover, device exclusivity alone is insufficient as contention on the CPU can delay the threads that submit successive GPU operations and kernels, increasing the measured kernel duration as well. Therefore, KREX combines GPU exclusivity with CPU protection for the threads that drive the measurement. Figure 4 walks through this protocol in eight steps, which we reference by circled number for the remainder of this subsection. For simplic-ity, we refer to the tenant granted region admission as the 

holder , while other tenants on the same GPU are its siblings .The client process runs the candidate program submitted for benchmarking; on NVIDIA, a driver shim forwards its GPU calls to a context process that owns the GPU context (§4.3). We describe the GPU protocol in terms of these context pro-cesses; on AMD, a runtime-loaded hook executes the same protocol directly in the client process (§5). 

GPU exclusivity. A region requires that no other tenant on the same GPU submit work while it runs and that all work those tenants submitted earlier has completed before it starts. To enter a region, the tenant’s context process acquires a region lock from its GPU’s coordinator , which admits one Feng et al. 

tenant at a time 1 . The holder’s context process then atom-ically claims a shared-memory gate , recording the holder’s identity and a unique epoch for this entry 2 . Each context process registers before initializing or submitting GPU work so the holder can identify all processes to drain. Registration is serialized with gate closure: processes admitted before clo-sure are included in the drain, while later arrivals must wait for the gate to reopen before using the GPU. The registration entries for the processes being drained cannot be reassigned to replacement processes until the region ends. To facilitate draining, each context process maintains an 

in-flight counter for GPU operations in the host submission path. Before issuing an operation that may leave work on the GPU (e.g., a kernel launch or async memcpy ), the submitting thread increments the counter and checks the gate. If another tenant is holding the gate, it retracts the increment and parks until the gate state changes, issuing nothing and consuming no CPU while blocked. Otherwise, it issues the call and decre-ments the counter on return, including error returns. With ordered atomic accesses, incrementing before checking the gate ensures that a racing submission is either covered by the drain or blocked before reaching the driver. Context creation and cleanup follow the same counter-and-gate protocol: the counter makes the drainer wait for admitted context changes to finish, while the gate prevents siblings from creating or cleaning up contexts during the region. After closing the gate, the holder’s context process wakes a background drainer thread in each sibling context process, independently of client activity 3 . Each drainer captures the epoch and waits for its process’s counter to reach zero. A zero counter only indicates that host submission has finished while asynchronously submitted GPU work may still be queued or executing. The drainer therefore synchronizes all contexts owned by its process, including candidate-created secondary contexts, keeping their handles valid until syn-chronization returns. After all context synchronizations suc-ceed, the drainer acknowledges completion by publishing the captured epoch in shared memory. The holder’s con-text process polls these acknowledgements and the in-flight counters, proceeding only when every sibling has acknowl-edged the current epoch and has a zero counter. Matching epochs prevents a previous region’s confirmation from being mistaken for completion of newly submitted work. 

CPU exclusivity. Blocking GPU submissions alone does not stop siblings from importing frameworks, compiling kernels, or generating inputs on the CPU. However, these activities can interfere with in-region measurement by pre-empting the holder’s GPU-submitting threads, delaying GPU submissions. KREX therefore freezes sibling process trees once their GPU work has drained 4 . The drain must fin-ish before siblings are frozen so their threads can complete outstanding driver calls and context synchronization. Specifi-cally, each candidate is placed in a per-tenant freezer cgroup 

at process creation, allowing KREX to pause the client and its subprocesses without waiting for client-side registration. For example, a client may execute import torch before reg-istering with the coordinator. The cgroup allows KREX to pause the client during this import, whereas a scheme that freezes only registered clients would leave it running. Tenants assigned to other GPUs must also be kept from competing for the holder’s cores without freezing their pro-cess trees. Therefore, in KREX, each GPU is assigned a dis-joint slice of physical CPU cores local to its NUMA node, and all of its tenants are confined to that slice. Within each slice, dedicated cores are reserved for the threads that submit GPU work when any tenant is in-region. This fixed partition prevents a tenant with high CPU demands from running on idle cores assigned to another GPU and interfering with its in-region measurement. The slice size determines the CPU capacity available to tenants of each GPU and is configured at deployment. §5 describes how these CPU boundaries are enforced. 

Region entry and exit. After completing the GPU and CPU isolation steps above, KREX performs the final prepara-tion for measurement 5 . It flushes L2 cache with a memset 

over an L2-sized buffer and pins the holder’s submitting threads to the cores reserved within its GPU’s CPU slice. The flush removes cache state left by siblings, while pinning protects the submission threads from CPU contention that could inflate the measured kernel duration. If synchroniza-tion fails, the entry request is canceled or times out, gate ownership is lost, or a participant dies during entry, the re-quest fails without starting measurement. Otherwise, the holder proceeds to execute the timed code 6 .Normal region exit begins when the timed code finishes. The holder’s context process first waits for all GPU calls during the region to finish host-side submission. After that, it thaws its siblings 7 . Only after thawing is complete does it reopen the gate and release the region lock 8 . If the lock were released before thawing finished, the next holder could acquire it and freeze the same sibling processes. The previous holder’s delayed thaw could then undo the new holder’s freeze, allowing those processes to compete for CPU time during the new holder’s measurement. If the holder dies before completing this exit sequence, the 

dispatcher (Figure 3) takes over cleanup. It first confirms that the holder’s admitted GPU work has ended, then thaws the siblings frozen by that holder before reclaiming the gate. To prevent recovery from racing with normal exit, KREX serial-izes the two paths for each context process so they cannot modify the gate and freeze state concurrently. It also binds cleanup to the original holder and entry epoch, preventing delayed recovery from reopening a later entry’s gate or un-doing its CPU freeze. After a failed entry or a holder’s death, reclaiming the gate alone does not make the GPU ready for a new measurement. KREX must first finish cleanup and KREX 

restore the affected GPU resources to a usable state. If a con-text becomes unusable, KREX retires and replaces it as part of recovery (§4.3). 

4.3 Off-Region Concurrency 

Region-granular exclusivity allows the work outside one candidate’s regions to concurrently execute with work from other candidates on the same GPU. However, a command that creates its own GPU context pays for GPU initializa-tion and context creation, which acquire a driver-level lock shared across the node. These operations take hundreds of milliseconds per command, and the shared lock serializes them even across different GPUs (§2.2). Simply running more commands concurrently therefore does not remove this bot-tleneck if each command creates its own context. 

Context pool. To eliminate this recurring initialization tax, KREX reuses GPU contexts across commands by separating their lifetime from that of candidate programs. Each candi-date still runs in its own client process. Each GPU context is held by a dedicated context process that remains alive across commands and serves candidates sequentially. KREX creates a fixed pool of these contexts and their owning processes for each GPU at startup instead of creating a new context for every command. The client process can exit independently of the persistent context process, allowing the context to be reused after the candidate exits. For each incoming command, the dispatcher pairs its client process with a free context process on the least-loaded GPU. Pairing occurs only at candidate boundaries and requires a control-plane round trip rather than context creation. Once the pair is connected, GPU calls do not pass through the dispatcher. If the pool is full, the dispatcher parks the client server-side rather than requiring repeated acquisition re-quests. This avoids the excessive acquisition requests that halved region throughput in an early deployment. A shim in the client process interposes on the driver API, including dynamically resolved driver entry points, and for-wards calls to the paired context process through shared-memory remote procedure calls (RPCs). This interposition preserves compatibility with unmodified candidate code. Un-supported calls fail explicitly rather than bypassing the pool. The context process also enforces GPU exclusivity for that candidate, as described in §4.2. This separation removes re-peated context creation from the normal command path. However, context reuse introduces two challenges: RPC over-head can perturb measurements, and retained device state requires cleanup and fault recovery between commands. 

Preserving measurement fidelity. RPC overhead can delay GPU submissions and introduce gaps between kernels inside the timed loop. KREX reduces this overhead through three mechanisms: 

1) Minimal shared-memory transport. The client and con-text process communicate through two single-producer, native  client GPU K1 K2 K3 measured interval    

> KREX  client ctx proc GPU K1 K2 K3 measured interval launch: one ring write, fire-and-forget event: ring round trip, request-reply sync: blocks until event reached time

Figure 5. One timed loop under native execution (top) and KREX with asynchronous forwarding (bottom). single-consumer shared-memory ring buffers. A kernel launch requires one fixed-layout ring entry, while bulk data moves through registered shared-memory areas accessible to both processes. 

2) Asynchronous forwarding. KREX reduces RPC overhead by using one-way forwarding for calls that do not require a synchronous reply. For example, kernel launches use fire-and-forget requests: the client submits the request without waiting for a reply, allowing forwarding to overlap with GPU execution (Figure 5). Timing events and synchroniza-tion operations instead use request–reply communication. Asynchronous forwarding may still add transport delay to the measured interval, but this delay is typically negligible relative to the interval. 

3) Spin–park waiting policy. Under this policy, threads spin briefly for a ring entry and park on a futex only if no entry arrives within the spinning interval. An entry that arrives during the spinning interval can be consumed immediately without a thread wake-up that costs several mi-croseconds. Blocking on every wait would add percent-level measurement overhead to a launch-dense timed iteration due to frequent wake-ups. If the wait persists over a given time threshold, the thread parks to yield CPU resources. 

Context cleanup and fault recovery. Context reuse car-ries device state across command boundaries, and the context process must explicitly clean up that state upon command exit. After a candidate finishes, its context process releases all of the candidate’s allocated resources such as memory allocations, host registrations and loaded modules. KREX retains the GPU context and a content-addressed library cache, and then synchronizes the device to check whether the context remains usable. If this health check fails because of an unhandled error such as a sticky launch error or an unfinished graph capture, the dispatcher retires and replaces the context process rather than assigning it another candi-date. A background check also detects clients that terminate unexpectedly or exceed their execution time limit, in which case it applies the same recovery rule to the context pro-cesses they paired with. If a candidate completes normally Feng et al. 

and cleanup finishes without errors, the context process will be reused to serve the next candidate. Therefore, a candidate failure is confined only to that run and can be recovered by a simple context-process respawn. 

## 5 Implementation 

KREX supports NVIDIA and AMD GPUs with about 20,000 lines of C++ for GPU-call interception and dispatch. The dispatcher, per-GPU coordinators, and kernel-evaluation ser-vice use 4,800 lines of Python outside the GPU-call path. Another 41,000 lines of C++ CUDA and NVML forwarding stubs are machine generated from annotated headers to avoid hand-written marshalling for new entry points. The NVIDIA and AMD implementations follow the same region protocol in §4.2 but differ in interception, draining, and freezing. On NVIDIA, the gate is implemented in the context process’s RPC dispatch loop. On AMD, the gate can be implemented either in the same pooled path or in a tools library loaded by ROCm at startup inside the tenant process. The library patches the runtime dispatch table to intercept each queue’s kernel launches. KREX provides both implemen-tations and exposes them as configuration options. Unlike NVIDIA’s host-submission counter, AMD’s counter tracks device completion: the counter is incremented on entry to each operation and decremented by a polling thread when the operation’s completion signal fires. The holder waits for sibling counters to reach zero without sibling-side context synchronization or dedicated drainer threads. On AMD, ten-ants are added to freezer cgroups only after initialization because freezing during initial memory registration causes failures on the evaluated system. 

## 6 Evaluation 

Our evaluation answers five questions: (Q1) how long bench-marking commands run and what fraction of their execu-tion time is spent in critical regions (§6.2); (Q2) how much throughput KREX gains over command-granular exclusivity (§6.3); (Q3) how closely its timings and candidate rankings match uncontended execution (§6.4); (Q4) how individual components and configuration choices affect the throughput– fidelity trade-off (§6.5); and (Q5) how GPU-call forwarding affects measured kernel duration (§6.6). 

6.1 Experimental Setup Testbed. We evaluate KREX on two testbed platforms each containing two 8-GPU nodes, for a total of 16 NVIDIA H20 and 16 AMD MI308X GPUs. 

Workloads. We evaluate KREX by replaying more than 20k benchmarking commands (16k on NVIDIA and 4k on AMD) collected from real kernel-agent runs. To collect these traces, we integrate KREX with Atrex Kernel Agent [2, 51] and kernel-design-agents [36] on NVIDIA, and GEAK [4] on 1 10 100 1000 Time (s, log) 050 100 CDF (%) H20 MI308X   

> (a)
> 050 100 Region/Command (%) KB FT AB
> (b)

Figure 6. Distributions of workloads. (a) Command dura-tions on two GPU models (log x-axis); (b) critical-region percentages of commands sampled on H20. AMD. We run these agents on tasks from three kernel bench-marks: KernelBench (KB) [38], Atrex-Bench (AB) [3, 51], and FlashInfer-Trace (FT) [15], and record every benchmarking command together with its associated source code for replay. 

Baselines. We compare four baselines. The native base-line provides command-granular exclusivity by running one command per GPU without KREX. KREX-serial runs one command per GPU through KREX to assess the runtime’s effect without concurrent sharing. The full KREX config-uration runs concurrent commands with region-granular exclusivity. The ungated configuration runs concurrent com-mands without region protection to evaluate throughput and measurement fidelity under unprotected sharing. We define command concurrency as the number of concurrent commands per GPU. Unless otherwise specified, KREX and 

ungated use a command concurrency of 16 on H20 and 4 on MI308X, with MPS [33] enabled for KREX on H20. 

6.2 Workload Characterization 

Figure 6a shows the distribution of command durations in the recorded agent sessions, with medians of 10.2 s on NVIDIA and 17.7 s on AMD. These durations reflect how long each command reserves the GPU under command-granular ex-clusivity. To quantify the fraction of execution time spent in critical regions, we also analyze 1069 commands from one hour of KREX-serial execution on H20. For each command, we sum the time spent in all of its critical regions. Figure 6b shows that the median region fraction is only 12%, and 73% of commands spend less than 25% of their execution time in regions. Median fractions vary across suites but remain below 25%: 4 .4% for KernelBench, 18 .2% for FlashInfer-Trace, and 22 .7% for Atrex-Bench. These results indicate substantial off-region work that KREX can overlap across commands. 

6.3 Throughput 

To measure benchmarking capacity, we conduct one-hour saturated replays with all baselines receiving the same com-mand stream within each platform. This replay excludes variability from agent reasoning and LLM response latency, allowing us to measure the benchmarking system’s through-put in isolation. We report throughput per 8-GPU node. On H20 (Figure 7a), KREX delivers 54.8 commands/min (cmds/min). This is 3 .4× the throughput of native at 16.0 KREX 025 50 cmds/min  (a) H20      

> 16.0 17.5 54.8 41.9 native KREX-serial KREX ungated 050 cmds/min  (b) MI308X
> 19.4 19.4 50.4 74.4

Figure 7. Benchmarking throughput. 050 100               

> (a) H20
> native KREX-serial KREX ungated 11.05 1.1 1.15 11.15 1.5 235timing ratio to native (log) 050 100
> (b) MI308X
> 11.05 1.1 1.15 CDF (%)

Figure 8. CDFs of timing ratios to native for commands with native kernel duration > 1 ms. Main plots use log x-axes; insets show x=0.97–1.15 on linear axes. cmds/min and 3 .1× that of KREX-serial at 17.5 cmds/min. Note that KREX-serial outperforms native by about 9% be-cause context reuse removes repeated context-creation over-head. KREX additionally overlaps commands outside their marked regions, where context reuse becomes more impor-tant at higher concurrency, as creating more GPU contexts exacerbates the context-creation bottleneck. Unexpectedly, ungated GPU sharing achieves only 41.9 cmds/min at the same command concurrency, below KREX’s throughput de-spite running without protection. This is because KREX uses MPS to further improve off-region concurrency. We discuss the effect of MPS in detail in §6.5. On MI308X (Figure 7b), KREX delivers 50.4 cmds/min. This is 2 .6× the throughput of native, which settles at 19.4 cmds/min. KREX-serial achieves nearly the same throughput as native because we disable context pooling on MI308X, forgoing its throughput benefits to avoid the greater fidelity loss it causes compared with H20. Ungated achieves a higher throughput of 74.4 cmds/min (3 .8× native), but at the cost of substantially worse measurement fidelity, rendering its measurements unreliable for kernel optimization. 

6.4 Measurement Fidelity 

High throughput is useful only if measurements remain faithful for kernel optimization. We evaluate measurement ≥ 10 1–10 0.1–1 < 0.1 11.5 2510 (a) H20 native KREX-serial KREX ungated ≥ 10 1–10 0.1–1 < 0.1 (b) MI308X timing ratio (log) uncontended kernel duration (ms) 

Figure 9. Timing ratios by kernel duration (log y-axes); boxes: p25–p75; whiskers: p05–p95; ticks: medians. fidelity by comparing reported kernel durations and candi-date rankings against native execution. For kernel durations, we measure how much reported timings exceed their na-tive references using the p95 timing inflation, denoted by 𝑃 ,where 

𝑃 = p95 (𝑟 ) − 1, 𝑟 = 𝑡 measured 

𝑡 native 

. (1) Here, 𝑡 measured and 𝑡 native are each command’s reported ker-nel duration and native reference duration, respectively. We report 𝑃 as a percentage; values closer to zero indicate less timing inflation at the 95th percentile, capturing the upper tail rather than only the typical shift. Because native mea-surements also vary across runs, we use a second native run as a control to distinguish sharing-induced distortion from run-to-run variation. We restrict the comparison in Figure 8 to commands with native kernel duration > 1 ms to reduce the influence of measurement noise, since even native exe-cution exhibits substantial run-to-run variation for shorter kernels. We separately analyze measurement fidelity across kernel durations in Figure 9. With the throughput configurations of Figure 7, KREX achieves 𝑃 = 2.5% on H20 and 2 .4% on MI308X, compared with 154% and 150% for ungated, respectively (Figure 8). For comparison, native and KREX-serial have 𝑃 = 0.9% and 1.2% on H20, and 3 .2% and 1 .6% on MI308X, respectively. Thus, KREX combines the throughput gains in the preced-ing section with p95 timing inflation close to that of native execution, whereas ungated sharing substantially inflates measured durations. KREX preserves typical timings as well as limiting upper-tail inflation. Median timing ratios for native, KREX-serial, and KREX span 0.997–1.000 on H20 and 0.993–0.997 on MI308X, compared with 1.331 and 1.032 for ungated, respec-tively. Across the same three configurations, 93 .6–97 .1% of timing ratios on H20 and 93 .3–94 .5% on MI308X fall within 5% of the native reference, compared with 11 .0% and 53 .8% for ungated, respectively. 

Fidelity across kernel durations. Figure 9 groups timing ratios by kernel duration under native execution on H20 and MI308X. For the two duration bands at 1 ms and above, KREX’s 𝑃 ranges from 1 .2–3 .0% on H20 and 0 .8–2 .5% on Feng et al. <1% 1-2% 2-5% >5% native kernel-duration gap 010 20 30 40 order flips (%)  (a)      

> native repeat KREX ungated −1 01trajectory Kendall's τb
> 050 100 CDF (%)  (b)

Figure 10. (a) Pairwise ordering-flip rates grouped by rela-tive kernel-duration gap in the first native replay. (b) CDFs of per-trajectory Kendall’s 𝜏 𝑏 ; ticks: medians. Both panels use the first native replay as the reference. MI308X, while ungated exceeds 100% in every band on both platforms. Shorter kernels require separate consideration: below 0.1 ms, even the native repeat has 𝑃 = 12 .1% on H20 and 7 .6% on MI308X, so distortion at this scale cannot be attributed solely to sharing. §6.6 separately examines how RPC forwarding affects measured duration. 

Candidate rankings. Beyond individual timing accuracy, we assess whether measurements preserve candidate rank-ings within an agent trajectory, comprising all candidates during an agent’s complete session for a single kernel task. We replay each trajectory under native, KREX, and ungated on H20 and rank its candidates by their measured kernel durations. We use the first native replay as the reference for all comparisons, and compare a second native replay, KREX, and ungated against it. The second native replay (native re-peat) captures run-to-run variation. Figure 10 reports these comparisons at the pairwise and trajectory levels. For each candidate pair within a trajectory, we compute its native kernel-duration gap from the first native replay: the absolute difference between the two candidates’ durations divided by the smaller one. For example, a pair with durations of 1.0 and 1.1 ms in the first native replay has a 10% gap. Figure 10a groups all such pairs by this gap and reports the fraction of pairs whose ordering differs from the reference order-ing. Grouping by gap distinguishes near-tied pairs, whose orderings are noise-sensitive, from pairs with larger gaps. KREX’s flip rate stays within three percentage points of the native repeat in every group. Figure 10b plots the CDF of per-trajectory Kendall’s 𝜏 𝑏 [23, 24] between measured and reference candidate rankings. Values closer to 1 indicate stronger agreement. Median 𝜏 𝑏 is 0.857 for KREX, 0.820 for the native repeat, and 0.432 for ungated. Together, these re-sults show that KREX achieves pairwise and trajectory-level ranking agreement close to that of the native repeat. 

6.5 Ablation and Sensitivity Study 

To separate the effects of GPU protection, CPU protection, MPS, and command concurrency, Figure 11 compares the throughput and 𝑃 of ungated, gate-on-GPU, and KREX at varying command concurrency levels on H20 and MI308X. 0.1 1 3 10 30 100         

> P: p95 excess (%, log) 020 40 60 throughput (cmds/min)
> (a) H20
> native KREX
> KREX gate-on-GPU ungated MPS off MPS on 0.1 110 100 1000
> P: p95 excess (%, log) 050 100 throughput (cmds/min)
> (b) MI308X
> native KREX

Figure 11. Throughput versus 𝑃 (log x-axes). Lines connect command concurrency 1, 2, 4, 8, and 16 in order; hollow markers indicate MPS on. Stars mark native and KREX. Ungated provides no region protection; gate-on-GPU pro-tects GPU regions only; and KREX additionally freezes sib-ling processes to protect host-side execution (§4.2). We also compare configurations with and without MPS on H20. On H20 at a command concurrency of 16 with MPS on, the measured 𝑃 is 23 .87% for ungated, 4 .63% for gate-on-GPU, and 2 .45% for KREX, at 60.7, 50.5, and 54.8 cmds/min, respectively. GPU protection provides most of the fidelity improvement; adding CPU protection further reduces timing inflation while also increasing throughput in this configu-ration. The same fidelity improvement is also observed on MI308X at a command concurrency of 8, with measured 𝑃 

of 495 .3%, 8 .6%, and 7 .6%, respectively. At a command con-currency of 2 or more, both protected configurations have lower timing inflation than ungated on both platforms. MPS increases KREX’s throughput with little change in timing inflation. On H20 at a command concurrency of 16, enabling MPS raises throughput from 44.2 to 54.8 cmds/min, a 24% gain, while 𝑃 rises from 2 .23% to 2 .45%. Command concurrency determines how much throughput KREX gains and how much measurement fidelity it sacrifices. On H20 with MPS on, increasing command concurrency from 1 to 16 raises throughput from 17.3 to 54.8 cmds/min; 

𝑃 is 1 .44–2 .21% at a command concurrency of up to 8 and reaches 2 .45% at 16. A command concurrency of 16 with MPS yields the highest measured KREX throughput on H20. On MI308X, command concurrency levels of 4, 8, and 16 yield 50.4, 60.1, and 52.2 cmds/min, with mean 𝑃 of 2 .15%, 7.61%, and 77 .65%, respectively. A command concurrency of 8 increases throughput at higher distortion, while 16 worsens KREX 0 400 800 KREX gate-on-GPU KREX-serial native (a) single-shot   

> 0400 800
> (b) median of ten
> kernel-duration shift relative to native ( μs)

Figure 12. Kernel-duration shifts relative to native’s median. Ticks: medians; boxes: p25–p75; whiskers: p05–p95. both metrics relative to 8. We therefore choose a command concurrency of 16 with MPS on H20 and the lower-distortion setting of 4 on MI308X. 

6.6 Impact of GPU-Call Forwarding 

We measure forwarding’s net effect on reported kernel dura-tion, rather than individual RPC execution costs. Figure 12 compares duration shifts relative to native’s median, using 896 measurements of the same candidate under each con-figuration: native, KREX-serial, gate-on-GPU, and KREX, with single-shot (left) and median-of-ten (right) timing. The KREX-serial median is 64 𝜇 s below native under single-shot timing and 56 𝜇 s below under median-of-ten. These small negative shifts may reflect run-to-run variation rather than a reduction in kernel execution time. Under single-shot timing, gate-on-GPU and KREX shift the median by 62 𝜇 s (0 .2%) and 28 𝜇 s (0 .1%), respectively. Adding CPU protection lowers the median shift under both protocols and reduces the p95 shift from 840 to 296 𝜇 s under single-shot timing and from 264 𝜇 sto 238 𝜇 s under median-of-ten. 

## 7 Discussion and Limitations 

Trust and region boundaries. KREX assumes cooperative candidates. The pool’s timeouts and reclamation limit abuse but do not prevent it. Regions are marked by the benchmark-ing code’s author, whether an agent generating the script or a developer providing a fixed benchmarking scaffold. KREX enforces exclusivity within the marked boundaries but does not validate their correctness. Even with correct marks, tim-ing fidelity is supported by empirical measurements without a theoretical worst-case error bound. 

Device-wide control. Some operations require control beyond regions. Clock settings, for example, affect all tenants and must be managed at deployment level. When a command requires device-wide control, KREX conservatively grants it a whole-device lease, suspending pooled work on that GPU while the command runs natively without the shim. 

Resource scheduling and failure recovery. KREX uses slot-based admission and provides no region-access fairness guarantee. Future work includes scheduling by GPU mem-ory and CPU core demands, and fair region admission to prevent starvation when commands monopolize critical re-gions. Recovery handles individual candidate failures, but dispatcher failure interrupts service and requires restarting the pool and resubmitting in-flight evaluations, motivating potential fail-over mechanisms. 

Generalization. Beyond kernel-agent benchmarking, region-granular exclusivity could support other GPU-based self-improvement workflows that select generated imple-mentations using performance measurements, provided measurement boundaries can be marked explicitly and the surrounding work tolerates sharing. We also plan to extend KREX to multi-GPU candidates and multi-node pools. 

## 8 Related Work 

GPU sharing and remoting. GPUs are shared at three levels. Time-sharing alternates whole contexts on a de-vice, at hypervisor-chosen quanta in NVIDIA’s time-sliced vGPU [35] or with faster, finer-grained switching in soft-ware [5, 48]. Spatial sharing runs tenants concurrently: MPS merges processes into one context and MIG partitions a device into isolated instances [33, 34], and a line of sys-tems builds on these to schedule, preempt, or right-size kernels for co-located inference [9, 18, 31, 43, 54, 56]. 

Cluster schedulers place and pack jobs across shared GPUs [17, 20, 30, 49, 50]. API remoting forwards GPU calls across processes, VMs, or machines for remote access or consolidation [13, 14, 16, 42, 53]. 

Kernel agents. AlphaEvolve [32], CUDA Agent [11], CUDA-L2 [44], and GEAK [47] generate and optimize GPU kernels, while vendor work studies how to guide kernel agents [40]. Tensor compilers such as TVM [7] and Tensor Comprehensions [46] automate kernel optimization, and autotuners likewise search kernel spaces through measure-ment [8, 57]. These approaches choose which candidates to evaluate; KREX addresses how to execute their benchmark-ing concurrently while preserving measurement fidelity, rather than proposing another search strategy. 

Kernel benchmarking and measurement. KernelBench evaluates generated kernels on exclusive GPUs [38], com-petition platforms use dedicated runners [55], agent bench-marks isolate task workspaces [52], and industrial systems profile in isolated environments [26]. FastKernels [37] evalu-ates generated kernels under production serving conditions; its focus on compatibility with serving interfaces differs from our focus on measurement fidelity under GPU shar-ing. Timing routines such as Triton’s do_bench [45] address measurement within a benchmarking harness. Work on en-vironmental bias [29] and layout randomization [10] further highlights the importance of measurement conditions. Sta-tistical benchmarking methods address experimental design and uncertainty [19, 22]. KREX complements these methods by excluding competing work during marked regions while allowing concurrency elsewhere. Feng et al. 

## 9 Conclusion 

In this paper, we showed that kernel agent benchmarking need not trade GPU utilization for measurement fidelity: only critical regions must run alone. We presented KREX, a runtime system for concurrent kernel agent benchmark-ing that realizes this insight with region-granular exclu-sivity. KREX drains competing GPU work and freezes sib-ling host processes inside regions while overlapping com-mands and reusing persistent GPU contexts outside them to avoid repeated, serialized initialization. Evaluations showed that KREX delivers up to 3 .4× the throughput of command-granular exclusivity at a negligible timing inflation, preserv-ing the relative performance signals that guide the agent’s search. 

## Acknowledgments 

The authors used an AI assistant for prose editing. All techni-cal content was authored and verified by the human authors. 

## References 

[1] Andrew Adams, Karima Ma, Luke Anderson, Riyadh Baghdadi, Tzu-Mao Li, Michaël Gharbi, Benoit Steiner, Steven Johnson, Kayvon Fata-halian, Frédo Durand, and Jonathan Ragan-Kelley. 2019. Learning to Optimize Halide with Tree Search and Random Programs. ACM Trans-actions on Graphics 38, 4 (2019), 1–12. doi: 10.1145/3306346.3322967 

[2] Alibaba Group. 2026. AKA: Atrex Kernel Agent. https://github.com/ alibaba/atrex-kernel-agent .[3] Alibaba Group. 2026. Atrex-Bench: End-to-End Operator Genera-tion Benchmark for Multiple DSLs. https://github.com/alibaba/atrex-bench .[4] AMD-AGI. 2025. GEAK: Generating Efficient AI-Centric Kernels. 

https://github.com/AMD-AGI/GEAK .[5] Zhihao Bai, Zhen Zhang, Yibo Zhu, and Xin Jin. 2020. PipeSwitch: Fast Pipelined Context Switching for Deep Learning Applications. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) . USENIX Association, 499–514. https://www.usenix.org/ conference/osdi20/presentation/bai 

[6] Pei Cao, Edward W. Felten, and Kai Li. 1994. Implementation and Performance of Application-Controlled File Caching. In Proceedings of the 1st USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI) . https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi-94/implementation-and-performance-application-controlled-file-caching 

[7] Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Ed-die Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2018. TVM: An Automated End-to-End Optimizing Compiler for Deep Learn-ing. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) . USENIX Association, 578–594. https: //www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/chen 

[8] Tianqi Chen, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Ziheng Jiang, Thierry Moreau, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2018. Learning to Optimize Tensor Pro-grams. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2018/hash/ 8b5700012be65c9da25f49408d959ca0-Abstract.html 

[9] Marcus Chow, Ali Jahanshahi, and Daniel Wong. 2023. KRISP: En-abling Kernel-wise RIght-sizing for Spatial Partitioned GPU Inference Servers. In 2023 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA) . doi: 10.1109/HPCA56546.2023.10071121 

[10] Charlie Curtsinger and Emery D. Berger. 2013. Stabilizer: Statistically Sound Performance Evaluation. In Proceedings of the 18th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) . doi: 10.1145/2451116.2451141 

[11] Weinan Dai, Hanlin Wu, Qiying Yu, Huan-ang Gao, Jiahao Li, Chengquan Jiang, Weiqiang Lou, Yufan Song, Hongli Yu, Jiaze Chen, Wei-Ying Ma, Ya-Qin Zhang, Jingjing Liu, Mingxuan Wang, Xin Liu, and Hao Zhou. 2026. CUDA Agent: Large-Scale Agentic RL for High-Performance CUDA Kernel Generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.24286. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2602.24286 

[12] Tri Dao, Daniel Y. Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. 2022. FlashAttention: Fast and Memory-Efficient Exact Atten-tion with IO-Awareness. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper/2022/hash/ 67d57c32e20fd0a7a302cb81d36e40d5-Abstract-Conference.html 

[13] José Duato, Antonio J. Peña, Federico Silla, Rafael Mayo, and Enrique S. Quintana-Ortí. 2010. rCUDA: Reducing the Number of GPU-Based Accelerators in High Performance Clusters. In International Conference on High Performance Computing & Simulation (HPCS) . doi: 10.1109/ HPCS.2010.5547126 

[14] Niklas Eiling, Jonas Baude, Stefan Lankes, and Antonello Monti. 2022. Cricket: A Virtualization Layer for Distributed Execution of CUDA Applications with Checkpoint/Restart Support. Concurrency and Com-putation: Practice and Experience 34, 14 (2022). doi: 10.1002/cpe.6474 

[15] FlashInfer Team. 2026. FlashInfer-Trace. https://huggingface.co/ datasets/flashinfer-ai/flashinfer-trace .[16] Giulio Giunta, Raffaele Montella, Giuseppe Agrillo, and Giuseppe Coviello. 2010. A GPGPU Transparent Virtualization Component for High Performance Computing Clouds. In Euro-Par 2010 – Parallel Processing . doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-15277-1_37 

[17] Juncheng Gu, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Kang G. Shin, Yibo Zhu, Myeong-jae Jeon, Junjie Qian, Hongqiang Liu, and Chuanxiong Guo. 2019. Tire-sias: A GPU Cluster Manager for Distributed Deep Learning. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 19) . USENIX Association, 485–500. https://www.usenix.org/ conference/nsdi19/presentation/gu 

[18] Mingcong Han, Hanze Zhang, Rong Chen, and Haibo Chen. 2022. Microsecond-scale Preemption for Concurrent GPU-accelerated DNN Inferences. In 16th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 22) . USENIX Association, 539–558. https: //www.usenix.org/conference/osdi22/presentation/han 

[19] Torsten Hoefler and Roberto Belli. 2015. Scientific Benchmarking of Parallel Computing Systems: Twelve Ways to Tell the Masses when Reporting Performance Results. In Proceedings of the Interna-tional Conference for High Performance Computing, Networking, Storage and Analysis (SC) . Association for Computing Machinery, 73:1–73:12. doi: 10.1145/2807591.2807644 

[20] Qinghao Hu, Meng Zhang, Peng Sun, Yonggang Wen, and Tianwei Zhang. 2023. Lucid: A Non-Intrusive, Scalable and Interpretable Sched-uler for Deep Learning Training Jobs. In Proceedings of the 28th ACM International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Lan-guages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) . doi: 10.1145/3575693.3575705 

[21] Andrei Ivanov, Nikoli Dryden, Tal Ben-Nun, Shigang Li, and Torsten Hoefler. 2021. Data Movement Is All You Need: A Case Study on Optimizing Transformers. In Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems (MLSys) . https://proceedings.mlsys.org/paper_files/paper/ 2021/hash/bc86e95606a6392f51f95a8de106728d-Abstract.html 

[22] Tomas Kalibera and Richard E. Jones. 2013. Rigorous Benchmarking in Reasonable Time. In Proceedings of the 2013 International Symposium on Memory Management (ISMM) . Association for Computing Machinery. doi: 10.1145/2464157.2464160 

[23] M. G. Kendall. 1938. A New Measure of Rank Correlation. Biometrika 

30, 1–2 (1938), 81–93. doi: 10.1093/biomet/30.1-2.81 KREX 

[24] M. G. Kendall. 1945. The Treatment of Ties in Ranking Problems. 

Biometrika 33, 3 (1945), 239–251. doi: 10.1093/biomet/33.3.239 

[25] Woosuk Kwon, Zhuohan Li, Siyuan Zhuang, Ying Sheng, Lianmin Zheng, Cody Hao Yu, Joseph E. Gonzalez, Hao Zhang, and Ion Stoica. 2023. Efficient Memory Management for Large Language Model Serving with PagedAttention. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) . doi: 10.1145/3600006.3613165 

[26] Gang Liao, Hongsen Qin, Ying Wang, Alicia Golden, Michael Kuchnik, Yavuz Yetim, Jia Jiunn Ang, Chunli Fu, Yihan He, Samuel Hsia, Zewei Jiang, Dianshi Li, Uladzimir Pashkevich, Varna Puvvada, Feng Shi, Matt Steiner, Ruichao Xiao, Liyuan Li, Nathan Yan, Xiayu Yu, Zhou Fang, Roman Levenstein, Kunming Ho, Haishan Zhu, Alec Hammond, Richard Li, Ajit Mathews, Kaustubh Gondkar, Abdul Zainul-Abedin, Ketan Singh, Hongtao Yu, Wenyuan Chi, Barney Huang, Sean Zhang, Noah Weller, Zach Marine, Wyatt Cook, Carole-Jean Wu, and Gaoxi-ang Liu. 2025. KernelEvolve: Scaling Agentic Kernel Coding for Het-erogeneous AI Accelerators at Meta. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.23236. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.23236 

[27] Linux man-pages project. 2026. madvise(2): Give Advice About Use of Memory. Linux man-pages 6.19. Accessed 2026-09. https://man7. org/linux/man-pages/man2/madvise.2.html 

[28] Linux man-pages project. 2026. posix_fadvise(2): Predeclare an Access Pattern for File Data. Linux man-pages 6.19. Accessed 2026-09. https: //man7.org/linux/man-pages/man2/posix_fadvise.2.html 

[29] Todd Mytkowicz, Amer Diwan, Matthias Hauswirth, and Peter F. Sweeney. 2009. Producing Wrong Data Without Doing Anything Obviously Wrong!. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Architectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) . doi: 10.1145/1508244.1508275 

[30] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. 2020. Heterogeneity-Aware Cluster Scheduling Policies for Deep Learning Workloads. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) .USENIX Association, 481–498. https://www.usenix.org/conference/ osdi20/presentation/narayanan-deepak 

[31] Kelvin K. W. Ng, Henri Maxime Demoulin, and Vincent Liu. 2023. Paella: Low-latency Model Serving with Software-defined GPU Sched-uling. In Proceedings of the 29th Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) . Association for Computing Machinery. doi: 10.1145/ 3600006.3613163 

[32] Alexander Novikov, Ngân V ˜ u, Marvin Eisenberger, Emilien Dupont, Po-Sen Huang, Adam Zsolt Wagner, Sergey Shirobokov, Borislav Ko-zlovskii, Francisco J. R. Ruiz, Abbas Mehrabian, M. Pawan Kumar, Abigail See, Swarat Chaudhuri, George Holland, Alex Davies, Sebas-tian Nowozin, Pushmeet Kohli, and Matej Balog. 2025. AlphaEvolve: A Coding Agent for Scientific and Algorithmic Discovery. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.13131. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2506.13131 

[33] NVIDIA Corporation. 2024. Multi-Process Service (MPS). Accessed 2026-08. https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/mps/ 

[34] NVIDIA Corporation. 2024. NVIDIA Multi-Instance GPU (MIG) User Guide. Accessed 2026-08. https://docs.nvidia.com/datacenter/tesla/ mig-user-guide/ 

[35] NVIDIA Corporation. 2026. NVIDIA Virtual GPU Software User Guide: Changing Scheduling Behavior for Time-Sliced vGPUs and MIG-Backed, Time-Sliced vGPUs. https://docs.nvidia.com/vgpu/latest/grid-vgpu-user-guide/ . Accessed 2026-09. [36] NVlabs. 2026. Kernel Design Agents (KDA). https://github.com/ NVlabs/kda .[37] Gabriele Oliaro, Yichao Fu, May Jiang, Owen Lu, Junli Wang, Zhi-hao Jia, Hao Zhang, and Samyam Rajbhandari. 2026. FastKernels: Benchmarking GPU Kernel Generation in Production. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.23215. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2605.23215 

[38] Anne Ouyang, Simon Guo, Simran Arora, Alex L. Zhang, William Hu, Christopher Ré, and Azalia Mirhoseini. 2025. KernelBench: Can LLMs Write Efficient GPU Kernels? arXiv:2502.10517. doi: 10.48550/arXiv. 2502.10517 

[39] R. Hugo Patterson, Garth A. Gibson, Eka Ginting, Daniel Stodolsky, and Jim Zelenka. 1995. Informed Prefetching and Caching. In Pro-ceedings of the 15th ACM Symposium on Operating Systems Principles (SOSP) . 79–95. doi: 10.1145/224056.224064 

[40] Siva Kumar Sastry Hari, Vignesh Balaji, Sana Damani, Qijing Huang, and Christos Kozyrakis. 2026. Improving Efficiency of GPU Kernel Optimization Agents using a Domain-Specific Language and Speed-of-Light Guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.29010. doi: 10.48550/ arXiv.2603.29010 

[41] Jay Shah, Ganesh Bikshandi, Ying Zhang, Vijay Thakkar, Pradeep Ramani, and Tri Dao. 2024. FlashAttention-3: Fast and Accurate Attention with Asynchrony and Low-Precision. In Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS) . https://papers.nips.cc/paper_files/paper/2024/hash/ 7ede97c3e082c6df10a8d6103a2eebd2-Abstract-Conference.html 

[42] Lin Shi, Hao Chen, and Jianhua Sun. 2009. vCUDA: GPU Acceler-ated High Performance Computing in Virtual Machines. In IEEE In-ternational Symposium on Parallel & Distributed Processing (IPDPS) .doi: 10.1109/IPDPS.2009.5161020 

[43] Foteini Strati, Xianzhe Ma, and Ana Klimovic. 2024. Orion: Interference-aware, Fine-grained GPU Sharing for ML Applications. In Proceedings of the Nineteenth European Conference on Computer Systems (EuroSys) . Association for Computing Machinery, 1075–1092. doi: 10.1145/3627703.3629578 

[44] Songqiao Su, Xiaoya Li, Albert Wang, Guoyin Wang, Jiwei Li, and Chris Shum. 2025. CUDA-L2: Surpassing cuBLAS Performance for Matrix Multiplication through Reinforcement Learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2512.02551. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2512.02551 

[45] Philippe Tillet, H. T. Kung, and David Cox. 2019. Triton: An In-termediate Language and Compiler for Tiled Neural Network Com-putations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Machine Learning and Programming Languages (MAPL) .doi: 10.1145/3315508.3329973 

[46] Nicolas Vasilache, Oleksandr Zinenko, Theodoros Theodoridis, Priya Goyal, Zachary DeVito, William S. Moses, Sven Verdoolaege, Andrew Adams, and Albert Cohen. 2018. Tensor Comprehensions: Framework-Agnostic High-Performance Machine Learning Abstractions. arXiv preprint arXiv:1802.04730. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.1802.04730 

[47] Jianghui Wang, Vinay Joshi, Saptarshi Majumder, Xu Chao, Bin Ding, Ziqiong Liu, Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma, Dong Li, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025. GEAK: Introducing Triton Kernel AI Agent & Evaluation Benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23194. doi: 10. 48550/arXiv.2507.23194 

[48] Bingyang Wu, Zili Zhang, Zhihao Bai, Xuanzhe Liu, and Xin Jin. 2023. Transparent GPU Sharing in Container Clouds for Deep Learning Workloads. In 20th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation (NSDI 23) . https://www.usenix.org/conference/ nsdi23/presentation/wu 

[49] Wencong Xiao, Romil Bhardwaj, Ramachandran Ramjee, Muthian Sivathanu, Nipun Kwatra, Zhenhua Han, Pratyush Patel, Xuan Peng, Hanyu Zhao, Quanlu Zhang, Fan Yang, and Lidong Zhou. 2018. Gan-diva: Introspective Cluster Scheduling for Deep Learning. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) . https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi18/presentation/ xiao 

[50] Wencong Xiao, Shiru Ren, Yong Li, Yang Zhang, Pengyang Hou, Zhi Li, Yihui Feng, Wei Lin, and Yangqing Jia. 2020. AntMan: Dynamic Scaling on GPU Clusters for Deep Learning. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) . https://www. usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/xiao 

[51] Lingyun Yang, Yuxiao Wang, Shenghao Liang, Linfeng Yang, Daocheng Ying, Chunbo You, Rui Zhang, Luping Wang, Yinghao Yu, Feng et al. 

Guodong Yang, and Liping Zhang. 2026. Are LLM-Generated GPU Ker-nels Production-Ready? A Trace-Driven Benchmark and Optimization Agent. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.14541. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2607.14541 

[52] Sharareh Younesian, Wenwen Ouyang, Sina Rafati, Mehdi Reza-gholizadeh, Sharon Zhou, Ji Liu, Yue Liu, Yuchen Yang, Hao Li, Ziqiong Liu, Dong Li, Vikram Appia, Zhenyu Gu, and Emad Bar-soum. 2026. AgentKernelArena: Generalization-Aware Benchmarking of GPU Kernel Optimization Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.16819. doi: 10.48550/arXiv.2605.16819 

[53] Hangchen Yu, Arthur Michener Peters, Amogh Akshintala, and Christopher J. Rossbach. 2020. AvA: Accelerated Virtualization of Accelerators. In Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Ar-chitectural Support for Programming Languages and Operating Systems (ASPLOS) . doi: 10.1145/3373376.3378466 

[54] Haoxuan Yu, Sheng Yao, and Wei Wang. 2025. ZipBatch: Multi-Tenant GPU Batching with Dual-Resource Regulation. In Proceedings of the 2025 ACM Symposium on Cloud Computing (SoCC) . 240–254. doi: 10. 1145/3772052.3772229 

[55] Alex L. Zhang, Matej Sirovatka, Erik Schultheis, Benjamin Horowitz, and Mark Saroufim. 2025. KernelBot: A Competition Platform for Writing Heterogeneous GPU Code. In Championing Open-source De-velopment in ML Workshop @ ICML . https://openreview.net/forum? id=bq9U4dmuyJ 

[56] Yongkang Zhang, Haoxuan Yu, Chenxia Han, Cheng Wang, Baotong Lu, Yunzhe Li, Zhifeng Jiang, Yang Li, Xiaowen Chu, and Huaicheng Li. 2025. SGDRC: Software-Defined Dynamic Resource Control for Concurrent DNN Inference on NVIDIA GPUs. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM SIGPLAN Annual Symposium on Principles and Practice of Parallel Programming (PPoPP) . doi: 10.1145/3710848.3710863 

[57] Lianmin Zheng, Chengfan Jia, Minmin Sun, Zhao Wu, Cody Hao Yu, Ameer Haj-Ali, Yida Wang, Jun Yang, Danyang Zhuo, Koushik Sen, Joseph E. Gonzalez, and Ion Stoica. 2020. Ansor: Generating High-Performance Tensor Programs for Deep Learning. In 14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems Design and Implementation (OSDI 20) . https://www.usenix.org/conference/osdi20/presentation/zheng