Title: MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.06745v1

Published Time: Mon, 10 Aug 2026 00:28:15 GMT

Number of Pages: 41

Markdown Content:
## 2026-08-10 

# MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Zhisheng Chen 1,* , Bingfan Zeng 2,* , Bangde Cao 3,* , Zhengwei Xie 4, Yuxuan Li 1, Jinhan Li 4, Zheng Lu 5,Xiangchen Guan 5, Zikai Xiao 6, Rui Qian 7, †, Jingwei Song 8, †           

> 1Nanyang Technological University, 2South China University of Technology, 3Beijing University of Posts and Telecommunications,
> 4University of Science and Technology of China, 5Peking University, 6Zhejiang University, 7Fudan University, 8Shanghai Jiao Tong University
> ∗Equal Contribution †Corresponding Author.
> #zhisheng.researcher@gmail.com
> §https://github.com/Feld-maxiu/MemPrism

Abstract Long-horizon agents rely on memory to reuse experiences, yet existing memory systems often assume that evidence can be directly consumed through a fixed representation. This leads to 

representation mismatch , where relevant information is available but not organized for the current decision. To this end, we propose MemPrism , a task-conditioned relational memory framework that separates persistent experience storage from decision-time working memory. MemPrism records inter-actions as the event stream and dynamically constructs relational views according to the current task context. A lightweight view policy selects the relation structure, evidence range, outcome condition, and granularity, while a deterministic composer and render transform historical facts into a temporary optical working-memory view for a frozen task policy. Experiments on long-horizon embodied and web-agent benchmarks show that MemPrism consistently improves the task performance, especially as trajectories become longer, while reducing memory token consumption. Furthermore, the learned view policy transfers across different VLMs without additional adaptation, demonstrating the effectiveness of task-conditioned relational views as a general memory interface for agents. 

## Introduction 

For long-horizon agents, past experience becomes useful memory only when it is organized to support the current decision. This challenge is becoming increasingly important as Large language model (LLM) and vision-language model (VLM) based agents tackle web navigation Zhou et al. (2024), software engineering Yang et al. (2024), tool use Qin et al. (2023), embodied interaction, and open-world exploration Wang et al. (2023a), where trajectories often span tens or even hundreds of steps. At this scale, success depends not only on local reasoning, but also on how effectively the agent can structure and use its growing interaction history. Recent work has advanced agent memory along three complementary directions. One line organizes raw trajectories into persistent structures, such as hierarchical summaries Lee et al. (2024), knowledge graphs Anokhin et al. (2024), and fact stores Xu et al. (2026). Another makes memory control itself learnable by treating writing, updating, deletion, and retrieval as part of the agent policy Yu et al. (2026). A third revisits the representation medium, optical memory renders long interaction histories as compact images to reduce token cost Feng et al. (2026). These directions improve how memory is stored, managed, and accessed. However, they often retain a common assumption: once relevant evidence has been preserved and retrieved, it can be delivered to the policy through a fixed representation Park et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023b); Yao et al. (2022). However, a unique representation is not equally useful for every decision Zeng et al. (2024). The same history may need to be organized in different ways for different tasks. Loop detection benefits from aligning repeated actions with their outcomes. State tracking requires changes to the same entity arXiv:2608.06745v1 [cs.AI] 7 Aug 2026 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Figure 1 | Conceptual comparison of different memory paradigms for long-horizon agents. Existing approaches improve memory organization, control, or representation medium, but generally provide history in a fixed form for downstream decisions. In contrast, MemPrism preserves stable interaction facts as an event stream and dynamically constructs task-conditioned relational views, allowing the same history to support different decision requirements. to be grouped over time. Failure analysis links actions to environment feedback, while dependency analysis connects related events that may be far apart in the trajectory. The timeline, state table, action-effect view, and dependency trace may all be built from the same facts, yet each highlights a different type of evidence. As a result, an agent may still fail even when the correct evidence has been stored and retrieved He, Pei, and Pentland (2026). We call this failure representation mismatch . It occurs when the available evidence is not organized in the relation form needed by the current subtask. This failure is different from storage failure and retrieval failure. It lies at the read-time interface between retrieved evidence and the task policy and also reveals a key observation in long-horizon memory: 

Does access to the right evidence guarantee that it will be useful for the current decision? 

This observation suggests a principle: persistent memory should preserve stable and reusable interac-tion facts Hu et al. (2025), while working memory should be constructed for the current decision. Rather than relying on a fixed representation, the agent should reorganize the same history according to the current observation, task goal, and execution state. Therefore, effective memory requires learning not only what to store and retrieve but how to present retrieved evidence to the policy. 

## 2MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

To this end, we propose MemPrism , a task-conditioned relational working-memory framework. MemPrism records real interactions in a unified event stream. At each step, a lightweight view policy selects the relation type, evidence range, outcome filter, and level of detail. A deterministic pipeline then constructs a task-conditioned view from the event stream, which a frozen VLM uses to produce the next action. This view is temporary and serves only the current decision; it is never written back to persistent memory. Only executed actions and the resulting environment feedback are appended to the event stream. MemPrism uses optical views as a unified output format, not only to compress history but also to make relations explicit. Its two-dimensional layout encodes structure directly: spatial proximity groups related actions, row and column alignment supports state comparison, arrows indicate change or dependency, and highlights draw attention to failures and task-relevant evidence. Thus, optical memory serves not merely as a compact representation but as a structured interface for task-conditioned relations. Our main contributions are as follows: • We formulate post-retrieval representation mismatch. We distinguish this failure from missing storage or failed retrieval: the required evidence is available, but its representation does not expose the relations needed for the current decision. We therefore formulate the construction of task-specific relational views as an explicit working-memory decision problem. • We decouple persistent history from temporary working views. MemPrism stores interactions in a unified and reusable event stream, while constructing a new working view on demand at each decision step. This separation avoids irreversible distortion caused by fixed summaries, repeated compression, or previously generated views. • We introduce a relational optical view space. Each view is jointly defined by its relation type, evidence range, outcome condition, and level of detail. Two-dimensional layouts ex-plicitly represent temporal order, action-outcome relations, entity-state changes, and local dependencies. • We introduce a task-conditioned view policy. We initialize the policy with action-conditioned soft supervision and further optimize it with trajectory-level grouped GRPO, which isolates the effect of view selection and allows performance gains to be more directly attributed to the memory representation interface. 

## Related Work 

Structured Memory for Long-Horizon Agents 

To reduce the cost of growing interaction histories, many methods convert raw trajectories into compact persistent structures Lee et al. (2024); Packer et al. (2023); Zhong et al. (2024). HiAgent builds hierarchical working memory around subgoals. AriGraph organizes episodic events and semantic knowledge in a dynamic graph Anokhin et al. (2024). A-MEM builds an evolving memory network with indices, tags, and links Xu et al. (2026). These methods improve history organization and access Jiang et al. (2026). However, their relation structures are mainly formed during memory writing or maintenance, and are then shared across later decisions Park et al. (2023); Wang et al. (2023b); Zeng et al. (2024). In contrast, MemPrism stores normalized events and builds relation views only when they are needed. 

## 3MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Learnable and State-Adaptive Memory Control 

Recent work treats memory control as a learnable policy Shinn et al. (2023); Zhao et al. (2024). Memory-R1 uses reinforcement learning to optimize memory writing, updating, deletion, and use Yan et al. (2026). AgeMem represents long-term and short-term memory operations as callable actions, and learns when to store, retrieve, summarize, or forget Yu et al. (2026). Other methods make memory access depend on the current agent state. MemCompiler selects cross-task experience from a structured state and converts it into text and latent guidance. SAM keeps compact cues to raw trajectories and restores distant history based on the current intent Ji, Li, and Hooi (2026). These methods learn which memory action to take, which evidence to access, or which guidance to produce. MemPrism studies a different stage: how the same evidence should be organized before it is given to the task policy. 

Optical and Visual Memory Representation 

Optical memory converts long text histories into two-dimensional images Li et al. (2026). AgentOCR renders observation-action traces as compact images and learns a dynamic compression rate Feng et al. (2026). MemOCR further assigns visual space based on layout and information importance Shi et al. (2026). These methods focus on storing or compressing history more efficiently. MemPrism instead uses two-dimensional layout to express relation semantics. Spatial proximity, alignment, arrows, and highlights expose action effects, entity states, temporal change, and local dependencies. Thus, optical memory in MemPrism is not only a compact medium. It is the output space of a task-conditioned relational memory interface. 

## Method 

Overview 

MemPrism addresses post-retrieval representation mismatch in long-horizon agents. It separates persistent interaction records from the working memory used at each decision step. The framework contains five modules: Recorder , Router , Composer , Render , and Adapter . The first four modules form the inference pipeline. Adapter is used only during training. Given a task goal 𝑔 , the agent receives an observation 𝑜 𝑡 at step 𝑡 . Recorder stores all interactions as an event stream 

E<𝑡 = (˜𝑒 1, . . . , ˜𝑒 𝑡 −1). (1) Router selects a view action from the current decision state. Composer selects events and builds a relational structure. Render converts this structure into an optical working-memory view 𝑉 𝑡 . A frozen task policy reads the current input and 𝑉 𝑡 to produce an environment action. Only the executed action and its feedback are appended to the event stream. The temporary view is discarded after the current step. 

Recorder: Persistent Event Memory 

Recorder stores each real interaction in raw and structured forms. A raw event is  

> 𝑒 𝑡

= (𝑜 −     

> 𝑡 , 𝑢 𝑡 , 𝑦 +
> 𝑡 , 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡

), (2) where 𝑜 − 

> 𝑡

is the observation before action execution, 𝑢 𝑡 is the executed action, 𝑦 + 

> 𝑡

is the feedback, 𝑟 𝑡 is the reward or step label, and 𝑚 𝑡 contains task and environment metadata. 

## 4MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Figure 2 | Overview of MemPrism, a task-conditioned relational working-memory framework. Mem-Prism separates persistent history from decision-time representations: Recorder maintains a unified event stream, Router selects the required relation view, Composer constructs a task-specific organiza-tion from the same facts, and Render produces a temporary optical working memory for the frozen task VLM. Adapter further learns view selection through action-conditioned supervision and grouped GRPO while keeping the remaining modules frozen. An event extractor Φ, together with rule-based checks, maps the raw event to ˜𝑒 𝑡 = (𝑡, 𝑒 ent  

> 𝑡

, 𝑒 act  

> 𝑡

, 𝑒 out  

> 𝑡

, Δ𝑠 𝑡 , 𝜉 𝑡 ), (3) where 𝑒 ent  

> 𝑡

, 𝑒 act  

> 𝑡

, and 𝑒 out  

> 𝑡

denote the main entity, normalized action type, and outcome type. Δ𝑠 𝑡 is a sparse set of state updates. 𝜉 𝑡 groups optional evidence, such as tags, images, boxes, and entity crops. The outcome type is one of exception, state update, or no observed change. Recorder keeps the latest observed value of each state key. It does not require the extractor to infer old values. After the environment returns the result of 𝑢 𝑡 , the event stream is updated by 

E≤𝑡 = E<𝑡 ⊕ ˜𝑒 𝑡 , (4) where ⊕ denotes temporal append. Relational structures and rendered views are never written back to the event stream. 

Router: Decision-Conditioned View Routing 

Router decides how the agent should view its history. It does not produce an environment action. Its input contains the current observation, the task goal, recent-event features, and global history statistics. These inputs are encoded as 

𝑧 𝑡 = Enc 𝜃 

 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑔, Summary (E <𝑡 ). (5) Router selects a joint view action 

𝑎 𝑣 𝑡 = (𝜏 𝑡 , 𝑤 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝛾 𝑡 ) ∈ A 𝑣 , (6) 

## 5MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Factor Options Relation 𝜏 Temporal, Effect, State, Dependency Range 𝑤 Short, Long, All Outcome 𝑐 All, Exception, Update, No-change Granularity 𝛾 Coarse, Medium, Fine 

Table 1 | Four factors of the joint view action. where 𝜏 𝑡 , 𝑤 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 , and 𝛾 𝑡 denote the relation type, temporal range, outcome filter, and rendering granularity. The two recent ranges contain the latest 6 and 10 events. The joint action space is 

A𝑣 = T × W × O × G , |A 𝑣 | = 144 . (7) Router predicts one distribution over all 144 actions 

ℓ𝑡 = 𝑓 𝜃 (𝑧 𝑡 ), 𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑎 | 𝑧 𝑡 ) = softmax (ℓ𝑡 )𝑎 . (8) A joint head keeps dependencies between the four factors. During training, actions are sampled from the policy. During evaluation, Router uses 

𝑎 𝑣 𝑡 = arg max  

> 𝑎 ∈ A 𝑣

𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑎 | 𝑧 𝑡 ). (9) 

Composer: Relational View Construction 

Composer converts the selected view action into a relational structure. It first selects events by the temporal range, outcome filter, and task goal 

bE𝑡 = Select (E <𝑡 , 𝑤 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝑔 ). (10) The selection step also restores task-related events that may be removed by a strict filter. For the dependency view, it keeps the required recent context. Composer then builds a relation-specific structure 

𝑆 𝑡 = C𝜏 𝑡 ,𝛾 𝑡 ( bE𝑡 ). (11) 

TemporalTrace. Events are ordered by time. This view shows action order and task progress. 

ActionEffect. Events are grouped by action type and entity. This view aligns repeated actions with their outcomes and makes failed loops easier to detect. 

EntityState. State updates are grouped by entity and state key. This view shows how an entity state changes over time. 

DependencyChain. The latest event is used as an anchor. Composer retrieves events that share entities, state keys, or nearby time steps. This view gives a local dependency trace. It is not treated as a verified causal graph. The granularity 𝛾 𝑡 controls the number of entries and the amount of detail. It does not change the stored events. 

## 6MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Render: Optical Working Memory 

Render maps the relational structure to an optical working-memory view 

𝑉 𝑡 = R𝜏 𝑡 ,𝛾 𝑡 (𝑆 𝑡 ). (12) Render uses a fixed visual grammar. Spatial proximity denotes event groups. Rows and columns support state comparison. Cards align actions and outcomes. Arrows show state changes or local dependencies. Highlights mark failures and task-related evidence. In visual environments, event images, boxes, and crops can also be added. Render is deterministic. The same events, view action, and rendering settings always produce the same view. The frozen task policy then produces an environment action as 

𝑢 𝑡 ∼ 𝜋 task 

 · | 𝑋 𝑡 , 𝑔, 𝐻 short  

> 𝑡

, 𝑉 𝑡 

, (13) where 𝑋 𝑡 is the current environment input and 𝐻 short  

> 𝑡

is the shared short-term context. 

Adapter: View Policy Learning 

Adapter trains Router in two stages. The task policy, event extractor, Composer, and Render remain frozen in both stages. 

Decision-conditioned initialization. For an offline decision state, a view teacher receives the current observation, task goal, event history, and reference next action 𝑢 ref  

> 𝑡

. It returns a soft distribution over view actions 

𝑞 𝑇 (𝑎 | 𝑡 ) = 𝑞 𝑇 (𝑎 | 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑔, E<𝑡 , 𝑢 ref  

> 𝑡

). (14) Router is initialized with LSFT = KL  𝑞 𝑇 (· | 𝑡 ) ∥ 𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (· | 𝑧 𝑡 )

+ 𝜆 𝐶 ∑︁ 

> 𝑎 ∈ A 𝑣

𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑎 | 𝑧 𝑡 ) b𝐶 𝑡 (𝑎 ), (15) where b𝐶 𝑡 (𝑎 ) is the structural cost of a view action. The cost term discourages large ranges or fine views when they are not needed. 

Outcome-guided optimization. Teacher supervision is based on reference trajectories and may not cover states produced by the deployed task policy. We therefore refine Router with grouped GRPO in online environments. For each task, we sample 𝐺 trajectories. Let 𝑅 𝑖 be the return of trajectory 𝑖 , and let 𝜇 𝑔 and 𝜎 𝑔 be the mean and standard deviation within the task group. The trajectory advantage is 

𝐴 𝑖 =



𝑅 𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑔 

𝜎 𝑔 + 𝜀 , 𝜎 𝑔 > 𝜀, 

0, otherwise .

(16) All view decisions in one trajectory share 𝐴 𝑖 . Let 𝜋 𝑣  

> old

be the rollout policy and define 

𝜌 𝑖,𝑡 = 𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (𝑎 𝑣 𝑖,𝑡 | 𝑧 𝑖,𝑡 )

𝜋 𝑣  

> old

(𝑎 𝑣 𝑖,𝑡 | 𝑧 𝑖,𝑡 ) . (17) Adapter updates Router with 

LGRPO = − 𝔼 𝑖,𝑡 

min  𝜌 𝑖,𝑡 𝐴 𝑖 , clip (𝜌 𝑖,𝑡 , 1 − 𝜖, 1 + 𝜖 ) 𝐴 𝑖 

 

+ 𝛽 KL 𝔼 𝑖,𝑡 

KL  𝜋 𝑣  

> ref

(· | 𝑧 𝑖,𝑡 ) ∥ 𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (· | 𝑧 𝑖,𝑡 ) 

− 𝛽 𝐻 𝔼 𝑖,𝑡 

H  𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (· | 𝑧 𝑖,𝑡 ) .

(18) 

## 7MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Here, 𝜋 𝑣  

> ref

is the policy after supervised initialization. The KL term limits large policy changes, and the entropy term keeps enough exploration. Only Router is updated. Thus, trajectory rewards are used to learn how history should be presented without changing the task policy. 

## Experiments 

Experiment Setup Benchmarks We evaluate MemPrism on three benchmarks. ALFWorld Shridhar et al. (2020) is a text-based embodied environment spanning six household activity categories, with 3,827 training instances and 140 evaluation games; we report task success rate (SR). EB-ALFRED is a visual embodied benchmark built on ALFRED Shridhar et al. (2020) and evaluated through the EmbodiedBench Yang et al. (2025) wrapper, providing RGB and text observations across 300 tasks in six subsets (Base, Common, Complex, Visual, Spatial, Long; 50 each); we report per-subset success rate and average SR. Results use EmbodiedBench rather than the official ALFRED leaderboard and should not be compared directly. Mind2Web Deng et al. (2023) is an offline web-agent benchmark with 1,009 training tasks across 137 websites and 31 domains, with three test splits (Cross-Task / 252, Cross-Website / 177, Cross-Domain / 912) measuring generalization; the model predicts CLICK, TYPE, or SELECT under teacher-forced replay and the next state always follows the human trajectory. We report step-level action accuracy and exact episode success. 

Baselines We compare MemPrism against the following methods. No Memory and Full Text History 

set lower and upper text-memory bounds. LangMem maintains working and long-term memory via episodic observation-thought-action chains. A-Mem Xu et al. (2026) uses Zettelkasten-style atomic notes with dynamic linking and memory evolution. Mem0 and Mem0 𝑔 Chhikara et al. (2025) extract facts via LLM calls and retrieve top-𝑘 similar memories (Mem0 𝑔 additionally employs a Neo4j entity-relation graph). SFT on CFG Data Yang et al. (2025) fine-tunes the task VLM on CFG-Bench, a fine-grained action understanding benchmark spanning physical interaction, temporal-causal relation, intentional understanding, and evaluative judgment. MemPrism-SFT uses supervised view distillation; MemPrism-SFT+GRPO adds online grouped GRPO on ALFWorld and EB-ALFRED. For mechanism analysis, we compare Recent-4 Text, Full Text History, four fixed relation views (ActionEffect, DependencyChain, EntityState, and TemporalTrace), dynamically selected text and optical views, and planners with one action-space factor fixed; these variants are not treated as external baselines. 

Implementation The task VLM is Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct Wu et al. (2025), kept frozen across all experiments. The textual event extractor (Phi) uses Qwen3.5-2B across all three benchmarks. The view planner encodes current observation, task goal, window statistics (last 8 events), and global statistics (last 64 events) through a frozen all-MiniLM-L6-v2 encoder, projected to a shared dimension, and fed into a lightweight Transformer followed by a 3-layer residual MLP head that outputs 144 joint view logits. The action space spans 4 view types × 3 temporal windows × 4 outcome filters × 3granularities. Evaluation uses greedy view selection. For all benchmarks, training uses 8 task groups per iteration with 16 trajectories each (128 total). ALFWorld allows a maximum of 50 environment steps with binary terminal success as reward. EB-ALFRED uses a maximum of 30 steps with a reward of success + 0.2 ×goal-condition progress. Both use clipping 𝜖 = 0.2, reference KL coefficient 𝛽 KL = 0.2, learning rate 3 × 10 −6, and one update epoch per iteration; ALFWorld additionally uses an entropy bonus 𝛽 𝐻 = 0.003. Mind2Web uses exact action match as the reward signal. 

## 8MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Main Results 

We compare MemPrism with existing memory systems. Recent-4 Text, Full Text History, fixed views, and constrained planner variants are reserved for the analysis in Section 4.3. 

ALFWorld and Mind2Web                                          

> ALFWorld Mind2Web Method Overall SR Test-Task Act. Acc. Test-Website Act. Acc. Test-Domain Act. Acc. Overall Act. Acc. Full history 31.43 12.57 7.95 7.91 8.79 LangMem 38.27 13.20 8.85 8.42 9.45 A-Mem 34.68 10.85 7.62 8.08 8.35 Mem0 37.49 11.42 7.35 7.28 8.12 Mem0 𝑔 35.34 11.08 7.12 7.05 7.92
> MemPrism(SFT) 34.29 12.95 10.05 10.85 10.81 MemPrism(SFT+GRPO) 40.71 14.23 11.13 12.83 12.87

Table 2 | Main results on ALFWorld and Mind2Web. SR denotes exact episode success and Act. Acc. denotes step-level action accuracy. Table 2 reports results on ALFWorld and Mind2Web. On ALFWorld, MemPrism-SFT+GRPO achieves 40.71% ,outperforming all compared methods and exceeding the strongest baseline LangMem (38.27%) by 2.44 points; GRPO improves over SFT by 6.42 points. On Mind2Web, MemPrism-SFT+GRPO attains 12.87% overall action accuracy, 4.08 points above Full History (8.79%). The four dialogue-oriented memory methods perform comparably to Full History (7.92%–9.45%), indicating that their fact extraction and vector retrieval mechanisms do not confer additional gains on web interaction tasks, further underscoring the necessity of MemPrism’s relation-aware organization in this setting. 

Method Base Common Complex Visual Spatial Long Avg. SR No Memory 10.0 8.0 6.0 2.0 0.0 2.0 4.7 Full history 16.0 10.0 14.0 0.0 10.0 12.0 10.3 SFT on CFG Data 16.0 16.0 8.0 8.0 4.0 6.0 9.7 A-Mem 8.0 10.0 12.0 0.0 6.0 6.0 7.0 Mem0 16.0 16.0 14.0 0.0 10.0 12.0 11.7 Mem0 𝑔 14.0 16.0 16.0 0.0 8.0 12.0 11.0 

MemPrism(SFT) 20.0 20.0 22.0 0.0 16.0 16.0 15.7 MemPrism(SFT+GRPO) 24.0 22.0 26.0 0.0 16.0 18.0 17.7 

Table 3 | Main results on EB-ALFRED. Table 3 reports results on EB-ALFRED. No Memory yields only 4.7% average SR, confirming the difficulty of visual embodied tasks without memory. SFT on CFG Data achieves 9.7% SR without memory, nearly doubling No Memory, indicating that fine-grained action understanding fine-tuning strengthens the VLM’s task comprehension. Full History raises SR to 10.3%. Among the three external memory baselines, A-Mem underperforms at 7.0% SR, while Mem0 reaches 11.7% and Mem0 𝑔 

reaches 11.0%, both comparable to Full History but below MemPrism. MemPrism-SFT achieves 15.7% SR, already exceeding all baselines. GRPO further improves this to 17.7%, yielding a gain of 7.4 SR points over Full History. 

## 9MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents Action Effect Dependency Chain Entity State Temporal Trace MemPrism Fixed Text Fixed Optical Dynamic Text Dynamic Optical      

> 25 30 35 40 45
> ALFWorld success rate (%)
> I. Memory scope and fixed views II. Dynamic organization × presentation
> 30.00 32.14 32.85 35.71 40.71 30.00 35.71 37.14 40.71 Fix View Type Fix Filter Fix Granularity Fix Range Full planner Frequency-Matched Random SFT SFT+ GRPO
> 25 30 35 40 45
> ALFWorld success rate (%)
> III. Constrained planner factors IV. Effect of Planner Learning and Optimization
> 35.71 40.00 32.86 38.57 40.71 30.71 34.29 40.71

Figure 3 | ALFWorld mechanism analysis. Top row: memory scope and organization × presentation ablation—Fixed Text and Fixed Optical share the same configuration and differ only in presentation medium; Dynamic Text and Dynamic Optical apply the same contrast under dynamic organization. Bottom row: constrained planner factors (each variant fixes one factor while keeping the others selectable) and effect of planner learning and optimization (frequency-matched random → SFT →

SFT+GRPO). 

Where Does the Gain Come From? 

Figure 3 consolidates four ablations that answer a single question: which design choices produce the final gain? 

Memory scope and relation structure. The four fixed relation views use identical evidence windows (recent long + medium + all), yet SR varies from 30.00% to 35.71%, with TemporalTrace as the strongest at 35.71%. Dynamic MemPrism further adds 5.00 points to reach 40.71%. The 5.71-point maximum gap under identical evidence directly validates the representation mismatch hypothesis: relevant information is already present in the history, but it is not organized in a way that serves the current decision—different relation structures expose information of different quality to the policy, ultimately leading to different success rates. 

Dynamic organization and optical presentation. Fixed Text and Fixed Optical share the same Tempo-ralTrace + recent long + medium + all configuration, differing only in presentation medium: 30.00% vs. 35.71% (+5.71). Introducing dynamic organization on text raises SR to 37.14% (+7.14), and further adding optical presentation reaches 40.71%. Optical presentation independently contributes 3.57 points, dynamic organization contributes 5.00 points, and their complementary combination yields the best result. 

Planner factors. Each constrained variant fixes exactly one factor to a specified value: View Type to TemporalTrace, Outcome Filter to all, Granularity to fine, or Temporal Range to recent long; the remaining factors are still selected by the planner. The full planner reaches 40.70% in this export. Fixing fine granularity causes the largest observed reduction, to 32.86% (-7.84 points), followed by fixing TemporalTrace as the view type at 35.71% (-4.99), recent long as the temporal range at 38.57% (-2.13), and all as the outcome filter at 40.00% (-0.70). This ranking indicates that adaptive granularity is the most consequential factor, while a fixed all-outcome filter is comparatively close to the full policy. 

## 10 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 5 10 15 20 25 30 35 40 45 50 Trajectory-length threshold (steps) 

> 010 20 30 40 50
> Success rate (%)
> Full History (SR) MemPrism (SR) Full History (tokens) MemPrism (tokens)
> 200 400 600 800 1000 1200
> Average prompt tokens

Figure 4 | ALFWorld success rate and average prompt tokens over cumulative trajectory-length thresholds. Solid circles report SR (left axis) and dashed triangles report prompt tokens (right axis). 

Planner learning and optimization. Frequency-Matched Random samples view configurations according to the learned planner’s overall configuration frequencies, but does not condition its choices on the current decision context, achieving 30.71% SR. The context-conditioned SFT planner improves SR to 34.29%, indicating that the gain cannot be explained solely by the marginal usage frequencies of different configurations. Matching the view type, temporal range, granularity, and outcome filter to the current task state helps the frozen task policy access more appropriate historical evidence for each decision. GRPO further increases SR to 40.71%. These results indicate that context-adaptive selection is effective: supervised distillation provides the planner with an initial context-conditioned selection capability, while online reinforcement learning further aligns view selection with downstream task success through task-level feedback. 

Long-Horizon Behavior 

Figure 4 demonstrate two clear advantages of MemPrism that become pronounced as trajectory length increases. 

Success rate advantage widens with longer trajectories. Full History holds a narrow lead at the shortest thresholds ( ≤5 and ≤10 steps, 0.6–1.3 points), but MemPrism overtakes it at ≤15 steps (24.3% vs. 16.0%) and never trails thereafter. The gap continues to widen, reaching 9.3 points at 

≤40 and ≤50 steps (40.7% vs. 31.4%). Notably, Full History plateaus after ≤30 steps (gaining only 5.0 points from ≤30 to ≤50), while MemPrism gains an additional 9.3 points over the same span, demonstrating that its advantage compounds as more history accumulates. 

Prompt tokens stabilize while Full History costs escalate. Full History prompt tokens grow nearly linearly with trajectory length, from 574 at ≤5 steps to 1,201 at ≤50 steps—a 2.1 × increase. In contrast, MemPrism token usage remains tightly bounded between 642 and 852 across all thresholds, with no upward trend beyond ≤15 steps. At the ≤50-step threshold, MemPrism achieves a 33.6% token reduction (797 vs. 1,201) while delivering a 9.3-point SR improvement, showing that compiled views compress history effectively without losing decision-relevant information. 

## 11 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 0 10 20 30 40 50 

Success rate (%)      

> MiniCPM-V-2.6 Qwen2.5-VL-3B Qwen3-VL-4B Qwen2.5-VL-7B
> 20 30 40 50 60 70

Token reduction rate (%) 

> 14.17 16.30 39.17 31.43 23.57 21.42 41.43 40.71 48.1% 43.9% 30.6% 33.6%
> Token reduction rate Full History SR MemPrism SR

Figure 5 | Full History and MemPrism SR across task VLMs, with the within-model prompt-token reduction overlaid. Qwen2.5-VL-7B is the planner’s training-time task VLM; Qwen3-VL-4B, Qwen2.5-VL-3B, and MiniCPM-V-2.6 use the same planner checkpoint without any per-model adaptation. Token counts are comparable only within a model. 

Cross-Model Transfer and Prompt Compression 

Figure 5 establish that MemPrism’s learned view policy transfers effectively to unseen task VLMs, yielding consistent improvements in both success rate and prompt efficiency. 

Universal success rate improvement. On its training VLM (Qwen2.5-VL-7B), MemPrism raises SR from 31.43% to 40.71% (+9.28 pp). The same planner, applied zero-shot to three unseen VLMs, improves every model: Qwen3-VL-4B from 39.17% to 41.43% (+2.26), Qwen2.5-VL-3B from 16.30% to 21.42% (+5.12), and MiniCPM-V-2.6 from 14.17% to 23.57% (+9.40). The gains are not concentrated at a particular model scale or architecture. 

Substantial prompt compression across all models. Token reduction ranges from 30.64% (Qwen3-VL-4B) to 48.15% (MiniCPM-V-2.6), with the training-domain model achieving 33.65%. In every case, higher SR is achieved with substantially fewer tokens. MiniCPM-V-2.6 exemplifies this interplay: its extreme visual token density (1.8M pixels → only 640 tokens) combined with strong OCR makes full-history inputs disproportionately verbose, yielding the largest compression margin (48.15%) and absolute SR gain (+9.40 pp) among all models. The co-occurrence of SR gains and token reduction across four models indicates that compiled representations are useful across model families. 

## Conclusion 

We presented MemPrism, a task-conditioned relational memory framework for long-horizon agents. Our central finding is that retrieving the correct evidence is not sufficient: how that evidence is orga-nized determines whether it can support the current decision. Even when the historical facts remain unchanged, different relational views can lead to different outcomes, with dynamic organization and optical presentation contributing complementary benefits. Motivated by this observation, MemPrism decouples stable event storage from the construction of temporary, decision-specific working-memory views. Experiments further show that its advantages become more pronounced as trajectories grow longer, and that the learned view policy transfers across different VLMs without additional adaptation. Thus, these results identify post-retrieval representation mismatch as a fundamental bottleneck in long-horizon agents and establish task-conditioned memory organization for effective memory use. 

## 12 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

## References 

Anokhin, P.; Semenov, N.; Sorokin, A.; Evseev, D.; Kravchenko, A.; Burtsev, M.; and Burnaev, E. 2024. Arigraph: Learning knowledge graph world models with episodic memory for llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04363 .Chhikara, P.; Khant, D.; Aryan, S.; Singh, T.; and Yadav, D. 2025. Mem0: Building production-ready ai agents with scalable long-term memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.19413 .Deng, X.; Gu, Y.; Zheng, B.; Chen, S.; Stevens, S.; Wang, B.; Sun, H.; and Su, Y. 2023. Mind2web: Towards a generalist agent for the web. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 28091–28114. Feng, L.; Yang, F.; Chen, F.; Cheng, X.; Xu, H.; Wan, Z.; Yan, M.; and An, B. A. 2026. Reimagining Agent History via Optical Self-Compression. arXiv preprint cs.LG/2601.04786 .He, Z.; Pei, J.; and Pentland, A. 2026. Memoryarena: Benchmarking agent memory in interdependent multi-session agentic tasks. In 4th Workshop on Towards Knowledgeable Foundation Models at ACL 2026 .Hu, M.; Chen, T.; Chen, Q.; Mu, Y.; Shao, W.; and Luo, P. 2025. Hiagent: Hierarchical working memory management for solving long-horizon agent tasks with large language model. In Proceedings of the 63rd Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) ,32779–32798. Ji, S.; Li, Y.; and Hooi, B. 2026. Memory is reconstructed, not retrieved: Graph memory for llm agents. In Forty-third International Conference on Machine Learning .Jiang, D.; Li, Y.; Li, G.; and Li, B. 2026. MAGMA: A Multi-Graph based Agentic Memory Architecture for AI Agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.03236 .Lee, K.-H.; Chen, X.; Furuta, H.; Canny, J.; and Fischer, I. 2024. A human-inspired reading agent with gist memory of very long contexts. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09727 .Li, J.; Zhang, Y.; Yang, X.; Qu, J.; Xu, J.; Yang, S.; Ding, J.; and Ngai, E. C.-H. 2026. Ocr-memory: Optical context retrieval for long-horizon agent memory. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 10409–10420. Packer, C.; Fang, V.; Patil, S.; Lin, K.; Wooders, S.; and Gonzalez, J. 2023. MemGPT: towards LLMs as operating systems. Park, J. S.; O’Brien, J.; Cai, C. J.; Morris, M. R.; Liang, P.; and Bernstein, M. S. 2023. Generative agents: Interactive simulacra of human behavior. In Proceedings of the 36th annual acm symposium on user interface software and technology , 1–22. Qin, Y.; Liang, S.; Ye, Y.; Zhu, K.; Yan, L.; Lu, Y.; Lin, Y.; Cong, X.; Tang, X.; Qian, B.; et al. 2023. Toolllm: Facilitating large language models to master 16000+ real-world apis. In The twelfth international conference on learning representations .Shi, Y.; Liu, S.; Yang, Y.; Mao, W.; Chen, Y.; Gu, Q.; Su, H.; Cai, X.; Wang, X.; and Zhang, A. 2026. MemOCR: Layout-Aware Visual Memory for Efficient Long-Horizon Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.21468 .

## 13 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Shinn, N.; Cassano, F.; Gopinath, A.; Narasimhan, K.; and Yao, S. 2023. Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning. Advances in neural information processing systems , 36: 8634–8652. Shridhar, M.; Thomason, J.; Gordon, D.; Bisk, Y.; Han, W.; Mottaghi, R.; Zettlemoyer, L.; and Fox, D. 2020. Alfred: A benchmark for interpreting grounded instructions for everyday tasks. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition , 10740–10749. Wang, G.; Xie, Y.; Jiang, Y.; Mandlekar, A.; Xiao, C.; Zhu, Y.; Fan, L.; and Anandkumar, A. 2023a. Voy-ager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291 .Wang, W.; Dong, L.; Cheng, H.; Liu, X.; Yan, X.; Gao, J.; and Wei, F. 2023b. Augmenting language models with long-term memory. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 36: 74530– 74543. Wu, C.; Li, J.; Zhou, J.; Lin, J.; Gao, K.; Yan, K.; Yin, S.-m.; Bai, S.; Xu, X.; Chen, Y.; et al. 2025. Qwen-image technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.02324 .Xu, W.; Liang, Z.; Mei, K.; Gao, H.; Tan, J.; and Zhang, Y. 2026. A-mem: Agentic memory for llm agents. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 38: 17577–17604. Yan, S.; Yang, X.; Huang, Z.; Nie, E.; Ding, Z.; Li, Z.; Ma, X.; Bi, J.; Kersting, K.; Pan, J. Z.; et al. 2026. Memory-r1: Enhancing large language model agents to manage and utilize memories via reinforcement learning. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , 12805–12825. Yang, J.; Jimenez, C. E.; Wettig, A.; Lieret, K.; Yao, S.; Narasimhan, K. R.; and Press, O. 2024. Swe-agent: Agent-computer interfaces enable automated software engineering. In The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems .Yang, R.; Chen, H.; Zhang, J.; Zhao, M.; Qian, C.; Wang, K.; Wang, Q.; Koripella, T. V.; Movahedi, M.; Li, M.; et al. 2025. Embodiedbench: Comprehensive benchmarking multi-modal large language models for vision-driven embodied agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.09560 .Yao, S.; Zhao, J.; Yu, D.; Shafran, I.; Narasimhan, K. R.; and Cao, Y. 2022. React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models. In NeurIPS 2022 Foundation Models for Decision Making Workshop .Yu, Y.; Yao, L.; Xie, Y.; Tan, Q.; Feng, J.; Li, Y.; and Wu, L. 2026. Agentic memory: Learning unified long-term and short-term memory management for large language model agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2601.01885 .Zeng, R.; Fang, J.; Liu, S.; and Meng, Z. 2024. On the structural memory of llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.15266 .Zhao, A.; Huang, D.; Xu, Q.; Lin, M.; Liu, Y.-J.; and Huang, G. 2024. Expel: Llm agents are experiential learners. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence , volume 38, 19632–19642. Zhong, W.; Guo, L.; Gao, Q.; Ye, H.; and Wang, Y. 2024. Memorybank: Enhancing large language models with long-term memory. In Proceedings of the AAAI conference on artificial intelligence ,volume 38, 19724–19731. Zhou, S.; Xu, F. F.; Zhu, H.; Zhou, X.; Lo, R.; Sridhar, A.; Cheng, X.; Ou, T.; Bisk, Y.; Fried, D.; et al. 2024. Webarena: A realistic web environment for building autonomous agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations , volume 2024, 15585–15606. 

## 14 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

# APPENDIX 

## A. Reproducibility Statement 

A.1. Artifact and result provenance 

The released artifact contains the source code for Recorder, Router, Composer, Render, benchmark adapters, training launchers, and evaluation scripts. Each reported result is accompanied by a machine-readable run manifest containing the code revision, working-tree status, data split, ordered episode list, random seed, model identifiers, checkpoint hashes, prompt version, decoding settings, and output paths. Rendered working-memory views are derived artifacts; the persistent event stream and environment trajectory remain the sources of truth. 

A.2. Models, checkpoints, and common settings 

All three benchmarks use the same Router architecture and tensor interface. Its text backbone is a frozen all-MiniLM-L6-v2 . The trainable checkpoint is a ViewPolicyModel with d_model = 512, eight attention heads, four Transformer encoder layers, a 1,024-dimensional feed-forward sublayer, and dropout 0 .1. Final evaluation takes the argmax of the 144-way Router distribution and uses greedy task-policy decoding. The run manifest binds each reported result to the exact task-policy, Phi, MiniLM, and Router model IDs and SHA-256 checkpoint hashes rather than to local filesystem paths. At decision step 𝑡 , the benchmark adapter serializes the current state as text 𝑥 𝑡 and supplies the task goal 𝑔 . MiniLM tokenizes each string to at most 256 tokens, applies attention-mask-aware mean pooling to the final hidden states, and 𝐿 2-normalizes the result, producing 𝑒 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑒 𝑔 ∈ ℝ384 . In parallel, 

EventWindowSummarizer converts the most recent eight raw/structured event pairs into 𝑢 𝑡 ∈ ℝ128 .Its first eight coordinates encode the action_frequency profile used by all three benchmarks. Raw actions are canonicalized from fields such as op , action_type , or type , and the eight largest normalized signature frequencies are stored in descending order. The next three coordinates are the exception, state-update, and no-observed-change ratios. Seven further coordinates record the normalized number and coverage of entities, the delta ratio, the maximum exception and no-change streaks, and recency-weighted state-change and exception densities. The remaining positions are zero padded to form the fixed 128-dimensional interface. This channel summarizes repetition and concentration without assuming a benchmark-specific structured action taxonomy. A separate vector  

> 𝑠 𝑡

∈ ℝ8, computed over at most the latest 64 events, contains the exception ratio, state-update ratio, normalized unique-entity count, normalized history length, a deterministic unit hash of the most recent entity, normalized terminal exception and no-change streaks, and recent state-update density. The encoder does not concatenate these heterogeneous features into one flat input. Four independent linear layers project 𝑒 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑒 𝑔 , 𝑢 𝑡 , and 𝑠 𝑡 to 512 dimensions; a learned 512-dimensional [CLS] token is prepended to form the five-token sequence [CLS , 𝑜, 𝑔, 𝑤, 𝑠 ]. Sinusoidal positional encodings and dropout are applied before the four-layer pre-norm Transformer, whose feed-forward blocks use GELU. The final [CLS] state passes through a 512 → 512 → 512 GELU MLP and LayerNorm to yield  

> 𝑧 𝑡

∈ ℝ512 . The current training and evaluation ViewPolicyModel.encode path does not pass the optional CLIP image embedding, so Router selection uses the five tokens above; environment images and compiled optical views are consumed downstream by the frozen task policy. Finally, three residual MLP blocks with 1,024-dimensional hidden layers map 𝑧 𝑡 to a single joint distribution over all 144 view actions. The reported 𝜏 , window/filter, and 𝛾 marginals are derived from these joint logits rather than trained by separate heads. 

## 15 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Table A.1 | Training configurations for the shared Router. The architecture and input tensor shapes are identical across benchmarks; rows below record only stage-specific optimization settings.                                  

> Setting Hyperparameters D1, shared AdamW; learning rate 10 −4; weight decay 0 .01; batch size 256; gradient-norm cap 1 .0; seed 7. D1, ALFWorld 50 epochs; cosine schedule; minimum learning-rate ratio 0 .01; 𝜆 cost =0.02; BF16. D1, ALFRED path 20 epochs; cosine schedule; minimum learning-rate ratio 0 .01; 𝜆 cost =0; no automatic mixed precision. D1, Mind2Web 50 epochs; cosine schedule; minimum learning-rate ratio 0 .01; 𝜆 cost =0.02; BF16. GRPO, ALFWorld/AL-FRED shared Planner train mode; AdamW; learning rate 3 ×10 −6; zero weight decay; clipping coefficient 0.2; KL coefficient 0 .2; one update epoch; update batch size 512; gradient-norm cap 1 .0; constant learning rate; rollout temperature 1 .0. GRPO, ALFWorld 100 iterations; 8 task groups per iteration; 16 trajectories per group; maximum 50 environment steps; entropy coefficient 0 .003. GRPO, ALFRED path 100 iterations; 8 task groups per iteration; 16 trajectories per group; maximum 30 environment steps; progress-reward coefficient 0 .2; entropy coefficient 0. GRPO, Mind2Web Planner train mode; learning rate 10 −6; 8 task groups per iteration; 16 trajectories per group;
> 𝜖 low =0.1, 𝜖 high =0.15; 𝛽 KL =0.01; rollout temperature 𝑇 =1.0; top-p =0.85; reward
> 1[action correct ]; 150 training steps.

A.3. Training dataset setup 

We use only the official training partitions associated with the three evaluation settings. ALFWorld distillation and online rollouts draw from its training games after the launcher removes unsupported task variants. The ALFRED path uses the official ALFRED training annotations for learning and reserves EB-ALFRED episodes for evaluation. Mind2Web uses its official training split to construct teacher-forced human trajectories and action-conditioned view-teacher records. No evaluation episode is used to optimize the Router. 

Cold-start distillation. We first train the encoder and joint view policy from the teacher distribution 

𝑞 𝑡 , before any online policy optimization. For each decision state, the loss combines distribution matching with the expected structural cost of a view action, KL (𝑞 𝑡 ∥𝜋 𝜃 ) + 𝜆 cost 𝔼 𝜋 𝜃 [𝐶 (𝑎 )] . The 144-way action head is trained jointly with the encoder and the three residual Planner blocks; the unused compatibility-only entity-hint head remains frozen. The resulting D1 checkpoint supplies both the online initialization and the fixed reference policy used by the GRPO KL term. 

Grouped GRPO training. For ALFWorld and the ALFRED training path, trajectories for the same task form a group and their terminal task signals are normalized within that group. For Mind2Web, each iteration contains eight offline-replay task groups with 16 trajectories per group, and the binary reward indicates whether the predicted action is correct. During this phase, the encoder, Phi, compiler, renderer, frozen task policy, and D1 reference policy remain fixed. Optimization updates only the shared three-block Planner and its 144-way joint action head. 

A.4. Parameter configurations 

The common architecture is fixed as described in Section A.2; Table A.1 therefore reports only stage-specific optimization settings. 

Hardware, software, and checkpoints. All final runs used one node with eight NVIDIA H200 GPUs; wall-clock training was 24 h for ALFWorld, 48 h for EB-ALFRED, and 24 h for Mind2Web. The peak per-GPU memory footprints were 127.0 GB for ALFWorld, 77.6 GB for EB-ALFRED, and 127.0 GB for Mind2Web. ALFWorld and Mind2Web Planner training use Python 3.10 and Transformers 4.51.1 with a CUDA-matched PyTorch, and ALFWorld model serving uses vLLM 0.8.5–0.11.0. EB-ALFRED uses 

## 16 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Python 3.9.20, Torch 2.4.0, AI2-THOR 2.1.0, NumPy 1.26.4, and Transformers 4.57.6 for simulation and Planner updates, together with Python 3.12, Torch 2.11.0, SGLang 0.5.14, Transformers 5.8.1, and NVIDIA driver 580.126.20 for model serving. Epoch and GRPO checkpoints store the full model, encoder, Planner, optimizer state, stage, epoch or iteration, metrics, and configuration; exported reference or final weight-only checkpoints may omit optimizer state by design. 

## B. EB-ALFRED Case Studies 

The following cards preserve the prompt–response order while avoiding a second full copy of the invariant EB-ALFRED policy prompt already given in Section E. Each card shows its decision-relevant prompt excerpt, the two visual inputs delivered to the frozen task policy, the logged model output, and the resulting progress update. The implementation concatenates the shared policy prefix, decision-specific suffix, current camera image, and compiled view into one multimodal role=user message. 

## 17 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Case 1  

> SYSTEM

Policy prompt Task. Put a clean pan on the counter. The EB-ALFRED task-policy prompt in Section E requires reasoning inside <think> tags followed by exactly one admissible action inside <action> tags. 

↓ 

> USER

Decision-specific prompt Current state. At Step 22, CounterTop , SinkBasin , and Faucet are visible, and the robot is holding the Pan .

Recent text history. A previous placement attempt was invalid because the robot was not holding an object; the subsequent action successfully picked up the pan. 

Attachments. The first image is the current camera observation; the second is the compiled 

TemporalTrace view. 

↓ 

> VISION

Visual inputs to the frozen task policy  

> Current observation
> Compiled

TemporalTrace 

↓ 

> VLM

Assistant output 

<think> The task is to put a clean pan on the counter. The robot is holding a pan and a counter is visible. Since the faucet is turned on, the pan has been cleaned; the next step is to place it on the counter. </think> <action>put down the object in hand</action> 

↓ 

> RESULT

Recorded outcome 

Last action executed successfully. Progress: 0 → 1/3. State updates: held_object -> none ;

pan -> on counter .

Figure B.1 | Case study of MemPrism on EB-ALFRED (part I). 

## 18 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Case 2  

> SYSTEM

Policy prompt Task. Move the two books from the bed to the desk. The same EB-ALFRED task-policy prompt in Section E requires reasoning inside <think> tags followed by exactly one admissible action inside <action> tags. 

↓ 

> USER

Decision-specific prompt Current state. At Step 21, the desk is visible and the robot is holding a book. 

Recent text history. Step 18 successfully found a book; Step 19 successfully found the desk. 

Attachments. The first image is the current camera observation; the second is the compiled 

EntityState view. 

↓ 

> VISION

Visual inputs to the frozen task policy  

> Current observation
> Compiled

EntityState 

↓ 

> VLM

Assistant output 

<think> I need to place the book on the desk as part of the task. The book is currently being held, and a visible desk has been located. The next step is to put down the book on the desk. </think> <action>put down the object in hand</action> 

↓ 

> RESULT

Recorded outcome 

Last action executed successfully. Progress: 0 → 1/2. State updates: book -> on desk ;

held_object -> none .

Figure B.2 | Case study of MemPrism on EB-ALFRED (part II). 

## 19 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

## C. Evaluation Protocols, Baseline Alignment, and Extra Results 

C.1. Common controlled protocol 

All memory-interface comparisons use the same ordered ALFWorld episode list, initial environment states, observation and admissible-action interfaces, short-term textual-context rule, Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct task backbone, maximum 50-step horizon, action parser, and decoding settings. Once online policies choose different actions, their subsequent observations naturally differ; fairness is therefore enforced at the initial-task and interface levels, not by forcing counterfactual per-decision observations to match. Each method may transform only the historical evidence generated by its own trajectory through the memory interface. The experiment record specifies whether a method trains the task backbone, a separate memory policy, a writer, or no parameters. The ALFWorld unit is an evaluation episode, not necessarily a unique source game. The run record contains the 140 ordered episode identifiers, the number of unique source-game identifiers, and the deterministic sampling or repetition rule used to construct the list. The primary effectiveness metric is task success rate. Efficiency metrics are mean and maximum prompt tokens per decision, visual tokens attributable to memory, mean rendered pixels, rendering latency, task-model latency, and stored bytes. Each archived result contains the raw success count and denominator together with a Wilson 95% interval. For conditions evaluated on the same ordered tasks, the archived comparison additionally contains a paired bootstrap interval for the SR difference, obtained by resampling the common episode identifiers while preserving within-episode pairing. 

C.2. External baselines 

We build every external baseline from its official public implementation rather than from a common reimplementation. LangMem, A-Mem, Mem0, and Mem0 𝑔 are evaluated as memory interfaces with the frozen common task policy. CFG-Bench instead supplies external fine-grained-action supervision and is therefore reported as a separately labeled task-policy baseline, not as a same-reader memory comparison. Each memory adapter receives the same serialized sequence of completed environment transitions, and retrieved content is placed in the same memory slot of the task-policy prompt. We retain the defaults of the evaluated release unless a change is required by this shared agent interface. The run manifest records the exact release or commit, writer model, embedding model, retrieval depth, update schedule, and insertion position where applicable. All auxiliary model calls and their token or API costs are included in the efficiency results, and no baseline is given observations or environment state unavailable to MemPrism. 

LangMem. We use LangMem from its official public codebase. Official implementation: https: //github.com/langchain-ai/langmem ; documentation: https://langchain-ai.github. io/langmem/ . Completed transitions are processed through its stateful memory manager and stored as a searchable collection; at decision time, the task goal and current observation form the retrieval query. We use the documented collection-management and search behavior of the pinned release, including its standard consolidation logic and query limit, while keeping the memory namespace local to each episode to prevent cross-task leakage. 

A-Mem. Our A-Mem baseline follows the released system. Official implementation: https:// github.com/WujiangXu/A-mem-sys/ . Each completed transition is introduced as a note, after which A-Mem generates its structured semantic attributes and connects it to related notes following its Zettelkasten-inspired organization. Retrieval uses the repository’s combined content-and-metadata representation and linked memory structure. We preserve the recommended note-construction, linking, and memory-evolution settings of the pinned release. 

## 20 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Mem0 and Mem0 𝑔 . Both variants are instantiated from the released Mem0 system. Official imple-mentation: https://github.com/mem0ai/mem0 . Mem0 uses the release’s standard extraction and memory-update pipeline over the serialized transitions. Mem0 𝑔 uses the same writer and retrieval interface but enables the graph-memory configuration so that extracted entities and relations can participate in storage and retrieval; its graph construction parameters are left at the recommended values for the pinned release. Reporting the pinned commit is important here because defaults on the actively maintained main branch may change after the evaluation. 

CFG-Bench transfer baseline. CFG-Bench organizes fine-grained embodied-action knowledge into physical interaction, temporal–causal relation, intentional understanding, and evaluative judgment. 

Project page: https://cfg-bench.github.io/ ; official implementation: https://github. com/CFG-Bench/CFG-Bench . We use the released data format, inference code, and judging pipeline without modification. For the downstream EB-ALFRED reference, we reproduce the paper’s transfer recipe by applying LoRA SFT to Qwen2.5-VL-7B on the CFG data for 800 epochs with AdamW, a learning rate of 10 −6, batch size 8, and eight NVIDIA H200 GPUs. The reported 90.3%/9.7% train/validation split is sampled with tier balancing. Because this condition changes the task-policy parameters using external supervision, we label it “CFG-SFT (reported-recipe reproduction),” pin its resulting checkpoint and repository commit, and exclude it from controlled same-reader memory-interface claims. 

C.3. Optical baseline scope Included baseline. We compare against the Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct optical-history condition that the AgentOCR paper denotes “OCR (w/o RL).” We refer to it as “AgentOCR (w/o RL)” for clarity. This condition renders the accumulated history as an image but does not apply RL to the task-policy model, making it the closest reported AgentOCR setting to our frozen-policy evaluation. official implementation: https://github.com/langfengQ/AgentOCR .

Excluded optical systems. The RL-trained AgentOCR system jointly learns environment actions and an adaptive compression rate using a compression-aware reward. We exclude it because its ALFWorld score therefore reflects task-policy RL in addition to the optical memory representation. MemOCR jointly trains its memory-drafting and memory-reading behaviors with budget-aware RL and full-parameter updates to Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct on long-context QA data. It has no reported ALFWorld setting, and a valid transfer would require training an ALFWorld policy model rather than inserting a fixed memory interface into our frozen policy. We therefore do not report a MemOCR number. official implementation: https://github.com/meituan/MemOCR . OCR-Memory proposes a learned optical locate-and-transcribe retriever, but no official implementation was publicly linked when our artifacts were frozen; without executable code, we cannot reproduce it under the same ALFWorld protocol. 

C.4. ALFWorld comparison with AgentOCR (w/o RL) 

Table C.1 compares the two non-RL task-policy conditions on ALFWorld with the same Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct backbone. AgentOCR reports 25.30% SR with 0.47k average memory-context tokens per step, whereas MemPrismachieves 40.71% SR with 797 average prompt tokens, or 0.80k after rounding. This is an absolute improvement of 15.41 percentage points in SR. The token column retains the accounting available from each artifact: AgentOCR reports memory-context tokens, while MemPrismreports the complete average prompt length. We therefore use it to describe the observed input footprint rather than claim an exactly budget-matched comparison. 

## 21 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Table C.1 | ALFWorld comparison with the 7B no-RL optical-history setting reported by AgentOCR. MemPrism keeps its task policy frozen while training only the view Router.             

> Method Task-policy backbone Task-policy RL SR (%) Avg. tokens/step AgentOCR (w/o RL) Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct No 25.30 0.47k MemPrism Qwen2.5-VL-7B-Instruct No 40.71 0.80k (797)

Table C.2 | ALFWorld resolution sensitivity under three maximum-long-side limits.             

> Max side (px) SR (%) Avg. prompt tok. Invalid action (%) 448 38.57 703 0.043 672 40.71 797 0.064 896 40.00 917 0.097

C.5. Optical-resolution sensitivity 

We evaluate the final MemPrism checkpoint on ALFWorld with maximum image long sides of 448, 672, and 896 pixels. The checkpoint, compiler, rendering rules, prompt template, ordered episode list, and decoding settings are fixed; the maximum-long-side cap is the only configured factor. Online trajectories, including later Router inputs and selected views, are allowed to diverge naturally after an action differs. The 672-pixel setting obtains the highest SR at 40 .71%, with 797 average prompt tokens and a 0.064% invalid-action rate. Reducing the longest side to 448 pixels lowers the average prompt length to 703 tokens and the invalid-action rate to 0 .043%, while SR decreases to 38 .57%. Increasing the longest side to 896 pixels raises the average prompt length to 917 tokens and the invalid-action rate to 0 .097%, without improving over the 672-pixel SR. We therefore retain 672 pixels as the default setting. 

C.6. View-selection distributions across benchmarks 

The zero DependencyChain frequency on ALFWorld reflects policy concentration rather than removal of this action from the view space. DependencyChain accounts for only about 3% of the marginal probability mass in the ALFWorld teacher distribution and therefore enters GRPO as a comparatively rare view type. GRPO further concentrates the policy on view types that receive more consistent task-level reward, so DependencyChain is never the argmax under final greedy selection and appears as 0 .00% in Table C.3. Its compiler and action remain available even though they are not selected in this evaluation. 

## D. Additional Method and Implementation Details 

D.1. Raw and structured events 

At decision step 𝑡 , the persistent history is an ordered event stream E<𝑡 = (e𝑒 1, . . . , e𝑒 𝑡 −1). The environ-ment transition is first preserved as a raw tuple 

𝑒 𝑡 = (𝑜 − 

> 𝑡

, 𝑢 𝑡 , 𝑦 + 

> 𝑡

, 𝑟 𝑡 , 𝑚 𝑡 ), (D.1) where 𝑜 − 

> 𝑡

is the pre-action observation, 𝑢 𝑡 is the action that was actually executed (or the recorded human action in Mind2Web), 𝑦 + 

> 𝑡

is the resulting feedback, 𝑟 𝑡 is the task signal, and 𝑚 𝑡 contains the step index and benchmark metadata. Raw events are never replaced by model summaries. 

## 22 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Table C.3 | Marginal view-selection distributions (%) across the three benchmarks.                

> View choice ALFWorld EB-ALFRED Mind2Web
> View type
> TemporalTrace 55.15 42.28 42.26 ActionEffect 31.24 21.98 7.62 EntityState 13.61 20.86 18.48 DependencyChain 0.00 14.88 31.64
> Window / outcome filter

recent_short / all 47.04 20.37 31.70 

recent_short / exception 3.73 1.86 1.17 

recent_short / state_update 24.84 27.37 17.80 

recent_short / no_observed_change 0.04 3.33 2.30 

recent_long / all 0.16 7.14 22.10 

recent_long / exception 0.00 1.16 0.69 

recent_long / state_update 0.00 12.29 10.60 

recent_long / no_observed_change 0.00 1.12 1.35 

all / all 0.00 8.30 8.62 

all / exception 0.00 1.12 0.14 

all / state_update 4.54 14.21 3.16 

all / no_observed_change 19.65 1.75 0.37 

> Granularity

coarse 38.56 26.81 22.76 

medium 0.00 35.39 56.85 

fine 61.44 37.80 20.39 

Phi and deterministic validators derive 

e𝑒 𝑡 = (𝑡, 𝑒 ent  

> 𝑡

, 𝑒 act  

> 𝑡

, 𝑒 out  

> 𝑡

, Δ𝑠 𝑡 , 𝜉 𝑡 ), (D.2) where Δ𝑠 𝑡 = {( 𝑘 𝑗 , 𝑣 new  

> 𝑗

)} 𝑛 𝑡  

> 𝑗 =1

is a sparse set of observed new values. The extractor is not required to hallucinate old values. Validation drops empty keys, unknown values, and exact duplicates within one extractor response, but it retains accepted deltas on repeated events. The event stream tracks the latest value per key to classify whether an update changes known state; individual view extractors may suppress unchanged values in their displayed output. The raw event is preserved as a fallback. The outcome is one of exception , state_update , or no_observed_change . Optional evidence 

𝜉 𝑡 may contain tags, an action-result image, entity boxes, and crops. 

D.2. Benchmark-specific Phi adapters ALFWorld. The adapter receives the pre-action textual observation, the selected admissible command, and the environment feedback. Rules provide hard evidence for the normalized action and explicit failure language, while Phi extracts the primary entity and sparse semantic state updates. There is no image-grounding stage. 

EB-ALFRED. The adapter records action metadata and a synchronized post-action camera frame; audit metadata may additionally contain before/post frame paths and hashes. Stage 1 extracts the primary entity, normalized action, and sparse state updates. If the simulator explicitly reports failure, the outcome is forced to exception and the state delta is cleared. Stage 2 uses the post-action image to localize at most three validated, visible candidate entities. Invalid or missing boxes remove only visual evidence; they cannot alter Stage 1 semantics. A stale-frame flag prevents unsynchronized pixels from being treated as grounded evidence. 

## 23 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

Decision-time compilation and environment update 

1. Input: current observation 𝑜 𝑡 , goal 𝑔 , persistent event stream E<𝑡 , frozen task policy, and view policy. 2. Encode 𝑜 𝑡 , 𝑔 , the last-eight-event window summary, and last-64-event global statistics; select 𝑎 view  

> 𝑡

.3. Apply the selected scope, restore task-matched evidence, and retain required recent dependency context. 4. Build the relation-specific intermediate structure and render the temporary optical view 𝑉 𝑡 .5. Query the frozen task policy with the current benchmark input, 𝑔 , shared short text context, and 𝑉 𝑡 ;obtain environment action 𝑢 𝑡 .6. Online benchmarks execute 𝑢 𝑡 . Mind2Web scores the prediction but advances with the human action and recorded next state. 7. Preserve the raw transition, derive and validate e𝑒 𝑡 , and append it once to obtain E≤𝑡 . Discard 𝑉 𝑡 .

Figure D.1 | Complete decision-time data flow. The temporary view influences the current action but cannot overwrite recorded history. 

Mind2Web. The adapter uses cleaned_html near candidate backend-node IDs when available, falling back to compact HTML snippets. The hard action metadata is normalized into operation, target, and value. Phi may emit only page_state , overlay_state , field_value , choice_value ,

result_state , or workflow_state . Because replay follows a valid human trajectory, an event may remain a state_update even when no member of this restricted semantic key set is extracted. 

D.3. Composer and rendering invariants 

Composer first applies the chosen time and outcome scope, then restores events whose normalized terms directly match the task goal. DependencyChain also retains the most recent context required to define its anchor. Thus, scope is a principal selection rule rather than an irreversible deletion: 

bE𝑡 = Merge  𝜎 𝑤 𝑡 ,𝑐 𝑡 (E <𝑡 ), TaskRelevant (E <𝑡 , 𝑔 ), RecentContext (E <𝑡 , 𝜏 𝑡 ) . (D.3) The four compilers then expose complementary relations: • TemporalTrace preserves event order and displays action, outcome, and sparse changes. • ActionEffect groups repeated action–entity pairs and aligns attempts with observed outcomes. • EntityState groups accepted new values by entity and state key, forming an ordered state chain without requiring inferred old values. • DependencyChain anchors on the latest available event and retrieves recent events sharing an entity or state key. It is a local dependency trace, not a verified causal graph. Granularity changes the number and detail of displayed entries but never changes the persistent event stream. Render uses fixed spatial semantics: proximity indicates grouping, rows and columns support comparison, arrows indicate change or dependency, and highlights mark failures or task-relevant evidence. The same event stream, action, goal, and renderer configuration produce the same image. Compiled views are discarded after the current decision and are never appended to persistent memory. 

D.4. Router architecture and optimization 

Router does not read the full rendered history. It consumes a 384-dimensional embedding of the current textual observation, a 384-dimensional goal embedding, a 128-dimensional summary of the most recent eight events, and eight global statistics computed from at most 64 events. The frozen text embeddings are projected into a 512-dimensional shared space and processed by a four-layer Transformer encoder with eight attention heads, a 1024-dimensional feed-forward sublayer, and 

## 24 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

dropout 0 .1. The planner head contains three residual MLP blocks with hidden dimension 1024, followed by layer normalization and one joint 144-way output layer. A 64-dimensional entity-hint head is retained for compatibility with the older rendering interface but is frozen by the current D1/D2 objective. A joint action head is used instead of four independent heads so that dependen-cies among relation, range, outcome, and granularity are retained. All three benchmarks use the 

action_frequency event-window channel in both training and evaluation. It canonicalizes each raw action signature and stores the eight largest normalized frequencies in descending order, thereby exposing whether the recent history is concentrated on one repeated operation or distributed across several operations without relying on a fixed action taxonomy. The remaining active coordinates encode outcome ratios, entity and delta statistics, maximum exception and no-change streaks, and recency-weighted state-change and exception densities; unused coordinates are zero padded to 128 dimensions. For supervised initialization, a teacher distribution 𝑞 𝑇 (𝑎 | 𝑡 ) is conditioned on the decision state and a reference next action. Router minimizes 

LSFT = KL  𝑞 𝑇 (· | 𝑡 ) ∥ 𝜋 𝑣 𝜃 (· | 𝑧 𝑡 ) + 𝜆 𝐶 ∑︁  

> 𝑎 ∈ A view
> 𝜋 𝑣 𝜃

(𝑎 | 𝑧 𝑡 ) b𝐶 𝑡 (𝑎 ), (D.4) where b𝐶 𝑡 discourages unnecessarily large or fine views. For GRPO refinement, grouped trajectories from the same task share the normalized trajectory advantage  

> 𝐴 𝑖

=

(

(𝑅 𝑖 − 𝜇 𝑔 )/( 𝜎 𝑔 + 𝜖 ), 𝜎 𝑔 > 𝜖, 

0, otherwise . (D.5) Only Router is updated. The task policy, event extractor, compiler, renderer, and reference view policy remain frozen. The clipped objective includes a reference-policy KL term and, when enabled by the benchmark configuration, an entropy bonus. Mind2Web constructs groups from offline-replay tasks and uses the binary reward 𝑅 𝑖 = 1[action correct ]. The complete benchmark-specific settings are reported in Table A.1. 

D.5. Computational and storage complexity 

Appending a raw and structured event is amortized 𝑂 (1), excluding the Phi model call. Let 𝑁 𝑡 = |E <𝑡 |,let 𝐷 𝑡 be the number of accepted state updates in scope, and let 𝑃 𝑡 be the number of rendered pixels. Scope filtering and goal-term restoration require 𝑂 (𝑁 𝑡 ) time. TemporalTrace and ActionEffect construction are 𝑂 (𝑁 𝑡 ); EntityState is 𝑂 (𝑁 𝑡 + 𝐷 𝑡 ); and the current backward dependency scan is 𝑂 (𝑁 𝑡 ).Rendering is 𝑂 (𝑃 𝑡 ). Router inference is constant in 𝑁 𝑡 after its fixed-size summaries are constructed. Persistent semantic storage is 𝑂 (𝑁 𝑡 + 𝐷 𝑡 ), plus any benchmark-specific images retained as raw evidence. These asymptotic costs exclude model inference, which dominates wall-clock time. Efficiency ac-counting therefore records Phi calls, task-policy calls, rendered pixels, visual tokens, prompt tokens, renderer latency, model latency, and peak stored bytes as separate fields rather than combining them into one opaque “memory cost” number. 

## 25 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

## E. Prompts, Schemas, and Action Definitions 

E.1. Phi event-extraction prompts 

Prompt E.0: ALFWorld Phi Event Extraction 

\begin{PromptText} You are phi, a structured event annotator for MemPrism. Extract ALL state changes from the current event. Return JSON only. Return Schema: {"entity": "primary object or unknown", "act_type": "put|go|open|look|examine|other", "delta_s": [ {"key": "...", "new_value": "..."}, ... ]}Existing tracked keys: {existing_keys} Rules: 1. Reuse an existing key when its semantic meaning matches. Create a short new key only for a genuinely new concept. 2. Always provide key and new_value. Omit old_value. 3. Noop/wait/terminal actions use act_type=noop or terminate, entity=unknown, and delta_s=[]. 4. Extract every state change in the event. A key may occur at most once in delta_s. 5. Copy the action verb into act_type. Examples: - action=’go to drawer 1’, result=’You arrive at drawer 1. The drawer 1 is closed.’ -> return {"entity":"drawer 1","act_type":"go","delta_s":[ {"key":"location","new_value":"drawer 1"}, {"key":"drawer 1","new_value":"closed"}]} - action=’open cabinet 1’, result=’You open the cabinet 1. The cabinet 1 is open.’ -> return {"entity":"cabinet 1","act_type":"open","delta_s":[ {"key":"cabinet 1","new_value":"open"}]} - action=’put mug in cabinet 1’, result=’You put the mug in cabinet 1.’ -> return {"entity":"mug","act_type":"put","delta_s":[ {"key":"held_object","new_value":"(none)"}, {"key":"mug","new_value":"inside cabinet 1"}]} - action=’look at drawer 1’, result=’drawer 1 is closed’ -> return {"entity":" drawer 1","act_type":"look","delta_s":[ {"key":"drawer 1","new_value":"closed"}]} - action=’take toiletpaper from drawer 2’, result=’You take the toiletpaper from the drawer 2.’ -> return {"entity":"toiletpaper","act_type":"pick","delta_s":[ {"key":"held_object","new_value":"toiletpaper"}, {"key":"toiletpaper", "new_value":"removed from drawer 2"}]} - action=’move toiletpaper 3 to drawer 2’, result=’You move the toiletpaper 3 to the drawer 2.’ -> return {"entity":"toiletpaper 3","act_type":"put","delta_s":[ {"key":"held_object","new_value":"(none)"}, 

## 26 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

{"key":"toiletpaper 3", "new_value":"inside drawer 2"}]} EVENT: {"observation": {observation}, "action": {action}, "result": {result}, "reward": {reward}, "metadata": {metadata} }\end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: EB-ALFRED Phi Semantic Stage 

\begin{PromptText} You are phi, a structured event annotator for MemPrism. Extract only observable state changes from the CURRENT event. Return one JSON object only, without markdown fences. The attached image is the POST-ACTION camera observation for the CURRENT event. Example 1: Before text: Visible objects: Ladle. Held objects: none. Action: pick up the Ladle Result text: Held objects: Ladle (held). Output: {"entity": "ladle", "act_type": "pick up", "delta_s": [ {"key": "held_object", "new_value": "ladle"}, {"key": "ladle", "new_value": "be held"} ]}Example 2: Before text: Held objects: Ladle (held). Action: put down the object in hand Result text: Visible objects: Ladle. Held objects: none. Output: {"entity": "ladle", "act_type": "put down", "delta_s": [ {"key": "held_object", "new_value": "none"}, {"key": "ladle", "new_value": "on table"} ]}Example 3: Before text: Visible objects: Sink, Faucet. Action: find a Sink Result text: Visible objects: Sink, Faucet. Output: {"entity": "sink", "act_type": "find", "delta_s": [] 

## 27 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

}Example 4: Before text: Visible objects: Sink, Faucet. Faucet is off. Action: turn on the Faucet Result text: Visible objects: Sink, Faucet. Faucet is on. Output: {"entity": "faucet", "act_type": "turn on", "delta_s": [ {"key": "faucet", "new_value": "on"} ]}Example 5: Before text: Visible objects: Pen. Held objects: Mug (held). Action: pick up the Pen Result text: Visible objects: Pen. Held objects: Mug (held). Environment feedback: Last action is invalid. Robot is currently holding Mug. Last action success: 0 Output: {"entity": "pen", "act_type": "pick up", "delta_s": [] }Required output fields and types: - entity: lowercase object targeted or changed by the CURRENT action; use unknown only if it is unidentified. - act_type: shortest lowercase verb phrase copied from the CURRENT action name. - delta_s: JSON array of objects with string fields key and new_value. Do not output entities, bounding boxes, or other fields. Existing tracked delta keys: {existing_keys} Rules: 1. If last_action_success is 0/false, or feedback says invalid/failed, return delta_s=[]. Otherwise every delta must be supported by before text, result text, or the post-action image. 2. Copy the shortest action verb phrase; do not replace it with a semantic alias or append the target entity. 3. Reuse a matching key. Prefer a normalized object name for object state/ location/relation; reserve held_object for the agent’s held-object state. 4. Always provide key and new_value, omit old_value, and emit each key at most once. 5. If no state change is observable, return delta_s=[]. CURRENT before-action text: {before_text} CURRENT action: {action} CURRENT result text: {result_text} CURRENT environment feedback: {feedback_text} CURRENT last action success: {success_flag} 

## 28 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

\end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: EB-ALFRED Phi Grounding Stage 

\begin{PromptText} You are phi, a visual grounding annotator for MemPrism. The attached image is the POST-ACTION camera observation for the CURRENT event. Locate only the candidate entities listed below and return one JSON object only, without markdown fences. The root object must contain exactly one field named entities. Each item contains exactly an entity string and a bbox_2d array. bbox_2d contains exactly four JSON numbers ordered [left, top, right, bottom]. Use a 0-to-1000 normalized image scale. Left and right are relative to image width; top and bottom are relative to image height. The top-left origin is (0, 0). Rules: 1. Use the exact lowercase candidate name. 2. Return at most one box per candidate and no unrelated entities. 3. Include a candidate only if visibly identifiable. 4. If none is located, return {"entities": []}. Candidate entities from semantic stage: {candidate_list} \end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: Mind2Web Phi Event Extraction 

\begin{PromptText} You are phi, a delta extractor for Mind2Web web-agent trajectories. Extract only semantic state deltas caused by the current web action by comparing rule-cleaned before/ after HTML. Return JSON only. Return Schema: {"delta_s": [ {"key": "one fixed key", "new_value": "new state value"}, ... ]}Allowed delta_s.key values: page_state, overlay_state, field_value, choice_value, result_state, workflow_state. Key meanings: - page_state: page, section, route, or main content area changed. - overlay_state: menu, dialog, dropdown, modal, or side panel opened/closed. - field_value: text input or typed form field value changed. - choice_value: select, checkbox, radio, option, or suggestion choice changed. - result_state: search results, candidate list, inventory, or visible result set changed. - workflow_state: task/process stage changed, such as order, submit, continue, checkout, or 

## 29 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

form progress. Rules: 1. Use only the allowed delta_s.key values. Never invent a new key. 2. The EVENT contains before_clean_html, action, and after_clean_html. Compare after_clean_html against before_clean_html using the action as the causal hint. 3. Do not output unchanged keys. Do not output empty new_value for unchanged state. 4. For TYPE actions, usually use key=field_value and new_value equal to the typed value. 5. For SELECT, checkbox, radio, or clicked suggestion actions, usually use key= choice_value. 6. For menu/dialog/dropdown open or close, use key=overlay_state. 7. For navigation/content transitions, use key=page_state; add result_state only when a result/list/candidate set changed. 8. If no specific semantic delta is observable, return delta_s=[]. Do not classify the outcome. Examples: Example 1 EVENT: {"before_clean_html": "<form><input placeholder=\"Enter zip\"></form>", "action":{"op":"TYPE", "target":"input zip enter zip", "value":"60602"}, "after_clean_html": "<form><input placeholder=\"Enter zip\" value=\"60602\"></form>"} Example 1 RETURN: {"delta_s":[ {"key":"field_value","new_value":"60602"}]} Example 2 EVENT: {"before_clean_html": "<form><select name=\"range\"><option>25 miles</option> <option>50 miles</option></select></form>", "action":{"op":"SELECT","target":"select range", "value":"50 miles"}, "after_clean_html": "<form><select name=\"range\"><option>25 miles</option> <option selected>50 miles</option></select></form>"} Example 2 RETURN: {"delta_s":[ {"key":"choice_value","new_value":"50 miles"}]} Example 3 EVENT: {"before_clean_html": "<header><button title=\"Menu\">Menu</button></header>", "action":{"op":"CLICK","target":"button Menu", "value":null}, "after_clean_html": "<header><button title=\"Menu\">Menu</button> <nav><a>Shop</a><a>Support</a></nav></header>"} Example 3 RETURN: {"delta_s":[ {"key":"overlay_state","new_value":"open"}]} Example 4 EVENT: {"before_clean_html": "<main><a title=\"View Inventory\"> View Inventory</a></main>", "action":{"op":"CLICK","target":"a View Inventory", "value":null}, "after_clean_html": "<main><form><input placeholder=\"zip\"> <select name=\"range\"></select> 

## 30 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

<button>Search</button></form></main>"} Example 4 RETURN: {"delta_s":[ {"key":"page_state", "new_value":"inventory search form"}, {"key":"result_state", "new_value":"inventory filters visible"}]} EVENT: {"before_clean_html": {before_html}, "action": {"op": ..., "target": ..., "value": ...}, "after_clean_html": {after_html} }\end{PromptText} 

E.2. View-teacher prompt and target schema 

Prompt E.0: Generic View Teacher 

\begin{PromptText} You are a view teacher for MemPrism. Your job: select a view action (tau, window, filter, gamma) that best exposes the historical structure a frozen target VLM needs in order to predict the reference next action. === OBJECTIVE (two-phase) === Phase 1 -- DISCRIMINATION: choose the view that provides the strongest discriminative signal for the reference next action -- the organization that makes the necessary evidence most salient and unambiguous. Phase 2 -- COST TIE-BREAK: only after Phase 1 identifies multiple equally discriminative candidates, prefer the lower-cost one. NEVER sacrifice tau-type match, evidence span, or structural clarity for cheaper axis values. Hard rules: - Do NOT generate, rewrite, or reveal the environment action. - Do NOT use future information. - window/filter decide which history is included; gamma only decides how the selected history is compressed and rendered. - Tau determines the organizing lens. The wrong tau hides evidence even if window/filter/gamma are correct. === REASONING FLOW (follow this order) === 1. IDENTIFY the historical structure that the reference next action depends on. Ask yourself: - Does it depend on SEQUENTIAL ORDER / recent progress / step-by-step subgoal tracking? - Does it depend on the OUTCOME PATTERN of repeated actions on the same entity (attempt count, first success, outcome transitions)? - Does it depend on the ACCUMULATED STATE of a specific entity (location, properties, inventory, holding)? 

## 31 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

- Does it depend on PRECONDITION / DEPENDENCY chains linking the current situation to earlier events (exceptions, context, same-entity history)? This step determines tau. Do NOT default to sequential order unless it truly dominates. 2. Based on the structure, SELECT TAU using the criteria below. 3. Decide WINDOW: how far back does the required evidence span? 4. Decide FILTER: would focusing on exception / state_update / no_observed_change sharpen the signal, or is full context needed? 5. Decide GAMMA: at what granularity is the structure best visible? 6. Only if two views are equally discriminative, apply COST TIE-BREAK. === tau: four mutually exclusive view types === Each tau answers a DIFFERENT diagnostic question. Never treat TemporalTrace as a default or fallback. 1. TemporalTrace -- Q: "Does the next action depend on what happened most recently, IN ORDER?" key = step index value = action + outcome_type + delta e.g. Step 1 | go sink | state_update | agent.location -> sink Step 2 | clean mug | state_update | mug.state -> clean Step 3 | put mug cab | exception | -PREFER when: - The critical signal is the most recent 1--2 steps or a specific recent subgoal sequence. - You need to detect a loop / repeated behavior in timeline order. - The next action directly continues or reverses the immediately preceding action. AVOID when: - The evidence is better expressed as entity state accumulation, action-outcome patterns, or dependency links. If a non-temporal organization would show the same evidence more compactly and clearly, do NOT pick TemporalTrace. - The key question is "what is the state of X?", "have I tried Y on Z before ?", or "why did W fail earlier?". 2. ActionEffect -- Q: "Does the next action depend on what happened when this action was tried on this entity before?" key = (action_type, entity) value = attempt count + each attempt’s outcome/delta e.g. clean + mug: attempt 1 -> state_update: mug.state -> clean put + mug: attempt 1 -> exception attempt 2 -> state_update: mug.location -> cabinet PREFER when: - The same action+entity pair appears at least twice in history, and the next action’s justification depends on how those attempts turned out. 

## 32 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

- You need to know whether this action already succeeded/failed on this entity, or what the last outcome of this action pattern was. - The reference next action is a retry, a variant, or a deliberate switch after seeing repeated outcomes. AVOID when: - There are no repeated action-entity pairs, or the repetition is irrelevant to the next decision. 3. EntityState -- Q: "Does the next action depend on what a specific entity currently IS or WHERE it is?" key = entity value = key -> new_value sequence over time e.g. mug: location: sink -> cabinet state: dirty -> clean agent: location: kitchen -> sink holding: - -> mug -> -PREFER when: - The next action’s justification hinges on an entity’s current location, state, property, or inventory status. - The goal or reference next action explicitly references a specific entity and its target state/location. - You need to compare or track entity properties across steps. AVOID when: - Entity identity is not the organizing principle; the question is about action patterns or step ordering. 4. DependencyChain -- Q: "Does goal completion or the reference next action depend on explaining the current/latest event by linking it to relevant prior events?" key = current/latest event as anchor value = linked previous events, with the immediate previous event first, then same-entity or shared state/delta-key-prefix events, then nearest earlier context events e.g. Step 10: put mug in cabinet | exception linked: Step 9: open cabinet (immediate previous event first) Step 8: take mug (same_entity: mug) Step 7: go cabinet (shared state/delta key prefix) PREFER when: - Goal completion or the reference next action requires explaining why the current/latest event happened in terms of earlier events. - The reference next action is a recovery, workaround, or departure from the obvious next step, especially after an exception or no_observed_change run. - The justification requires connecting the current event to earlier preconditions, entity context, or prior failures. 

## 33 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

- The dominant signal is NOT a single latest outcome, but a multi-step causal or contextual chain. AVOID when: - The next action can be fully justified by a single recent step or one entity’s current state without backtracking. === window: evidence span === recent_short = last 6 steps recent_long = last 10 steps all = entire history Let the required evidence span determine the window; do NOT default to recent_short. - Use recent_short only when ALL discriminative evidence is confined to the last 6 steps. - Use recent_long / all when the evidence draws on earlier state accumulation, dependency chains, repeated-attempt patterns spanning >6 steps, or earlier subgoal completions. === filter: outcome filter === all: include all events exception: include only exception events state_update: include only state_update events no_observed_change: include only no_observed_change events Choose the most selective filter that preserves ALL necessary discriminative evidence. Use all only when the contrast between different outcome types is itself important. Do not use all as a default for safety. For DependencyChain, the current/latest event and immediate previous event are always preserved from the full unfiltered stream; window/filter only affect extra historical candidates. === gamma: rendering granularity === fine: preserve all selected events/items. Use when exact order, exact attempt, exact parameter/value, or fine distinctions between similar events are required. medium: preserve all discriminative turning points and state/outcome changes; collapse only clearly redundant repetitions. coarse: preserve endpoints, latest state/outcome, exceptions, outcome transitions, and task-relevant entity events; collapse redundant runs with summary counts. Do NOT default to fine. Match gamma to what the structure needs: - If the diagnostic signal is in aggregate patterns, outcome transitions, or entity state evolution, medium or coarse can be MORE discriminative than fine because they suppress noise and highlight structure. - Use fine only when losing ordering, exact values, or step-level distinctions would destroy the discriminative signal. Default gamma guardrails: - If window = recent_short (only 6 steps), default to gamma = fine unless 

## 34 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

compression clearly preserves all discriminative evidence. - If window = recent_long or all, default to gamma = medium; use fine only when exact ordering/details remain critical. - Use coarse only when high-level confirmation suffices and compression cannot hide key evidence. View-specific gamma behavior: TemporalTrace: coarse keeps first/latest events, exceptions, outcome transitions, and repeated-run counts; medium keeps state_update/exception events and representative no_observed_change runs; fine keeps the full sequence. ActionEffect: coarse shows attempt count, first/latest attempts, first state_update/exception, and outcome histogram per group; medium shows outcome-transition attempts and recent attempts; fine shows all attempts. EntityState: coarse shows initial -> latest plus key intermediate values; medium shows all distinct value changes; fine shows every state_update with source step/action. DependencyChain: coarse: up to 6 chain events; medium: up to 8 chain events; fine: up to 10 chain events. All granularities keep the current/latest anchor and prioritize the immediate previous event before additional linked history. === COST TIE-BREAK (Phase 2 only) === Apply ONLY when two or more view candidates are equally discriminative after Phase 1. The order is: shorter window < longer window more selective filter < all coarse < medium < fine NEVER downgrade tau-type match, evidence span, or structural clarity to save cost. NEVER select recent_short + fine just because it is the most common or safest configuration. Return top-{top_k} soft labels as a distribution. Scores should sum to approximately 1. Rationales are for logging only. Input JSON: {"observation": {observation}, "goal": {goal}, "event_stream": {event_stream}, "reference_next_action": {reference_next_action}, "target_vlm_spec": {target_vlm_spec}, "view_action_space": {view_action_space} }Output JSON schema: {"teacher_distribution": [ {"a_view": { 

## 35 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

"tau": "ActionEffect", "window": "recent_short", "filter": "exception", "gamma": "fine" }, "score": 0.52, "rationale": "brief note" }]}Return at most {top_k} items. \end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: Mind2Web View Teacher 

\begin{PromptText} You are a Mind2Web view teacher for MemPrism. Your job is to select a view action (tau, window, filter, gamma) that best exposes the historical web interaction structure a frozen target VLM needs in order to predict the reference next action. You are given compact summaries, not raw HTML. Do not request raw HTML and do not generate environment actions. Choose only view actions. === Mind2Web evidence model === - current_summary describes the current candidate-window page state: surface_state, focus_label, page_topic, active_nav, visible_ctas, global_nav_items, state_flags, anchors, and focal_text. - prior_summary_events contains ALL previous decision points. Each item contains a compact summary, the human expert action, and a compact outcome_summary. Use the full history to decide whether the required evidence fits recent_short, recent_long, or all. - summary_diffs are rule-derived hints about changed summary keys. They are useful evidence, but you should not blindly trust them if the summaries and actions suggest a different structure. === tau selection for web trajectories === TemporalTrace: choose when the next action depends on the ordered navigation/ input sequence, such as Menu -> category -> CTA, or when recent progress is the main evidence. ActionEffect: choose when repeated attempts of the same action on the same target matter, such as retrying clicks, repeated typing, or observing no change after an action. EntityState: choose when the next action depends on accumulated web slots such as active_nav, page_topic, focused_input, typed_value, selected_filter, dialog state, or form progress. DependencyChain: choose when the useful evidence should be organized around the latest/current event as an anchor plus linked previous events. The implementation links the immediate previous event first, then same-entity or shared-delta-key events, 

## 36 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

then nearest earlier context; treat it as heuristic dependency evidence, not a semantic prerequisite graph. === window/filter/gamma guidance === - recent_short means the last 6 steps contain all discriminative evidence; recent_long means the last 10 steps are needed; all means earlier steps are required. - filter=all is usually appropriate for web navigation traces. Use exception, state_update, or no_observed_change only when that outcome type is the discriminative signal. - gamma=fine keeps exact step-level details. Use it for short histories or similar targets. Use medium/coarse when the structure is obvious from accumulated slots or high-level navigation. - Apply cost tie-break only after discriminative quality is equal: shorter window, more selective filter, and lower gamma cost are better. Return top-{top_k} soft labels as a distribution. Scores should sum to approximately 1. Rationales are for logging only. Input JSON: {"goal": {goal}, "current_summary": {current_summary}, "prior_summary_events": {prior_summary_events}, "summary_diffs": {summary_diffs}, "reference_next_action": {reference_next_action}, "observation_stats": {observation_stats}, "target_vlm_spec": {target_vlm_spec}, "view_action_space": {view_action_space} }Output JSON schema: {"teacher_distribution": [ {"a_view": { "tau": "TemporalTrace", "window": "recent_short", "filter": "all", "gamma": "fine" }, "score": 0.52, "rationale": "brief note" }]}Return at most {top_k} items. \end{PromptText} 

## 37 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

E.3. Task-policy prompts 

Prompt E.0: ALFWorld Task Policy 

\begin{PromptText} <image> You are an expert agent operating in the ALFRED embodied Environment. Your task is to: {goal} Prior to this step, you have already taken {step_count} step(s). Recent interaction history: {recent_observation_action_result_records} You are now at step {current_step} and your current observation is: { observation} Your admissible actions of the current situation are: [{admissible_actions}]. The image provides an optical view relevant to this task. Now it’s your turn to take an action. You should first reason step-by-step about the current situation. This reasoning process MUST be enclosed within <think></think> tags. Once finished, choose an admissible action and present it within <action></action> tags. \end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: EB-ALFRED Task Policy—System Message 

\begin{PromptText} <image: current synchronized simulator observation> <image: MemPrism optical memory view> ## You are a robot operating in a home. Given a task, you must accomplish the task using a defined set of actions to achieve the desired outcome. ## The available action id (0 ~ {max_id}) and action names are: {available_action_names} {task_execution_examples} ## Guidelines 1. Visibility: Always locate a visible object by the ’find’ action before interacting with it. 2. Action Validity: Choose exactly ONE action name verbatim from the available actions. Use ’find’ before interacting with a target. Pick up only when the hand is empty . Open, close, turn on, and turn off only when the current object state permits. To place a held object, first find the target receptacle and then use exactly ’put down the object in hand’. Use ’drop the object in hand’ only when no placement target is required. 3. Prevent Repeating Action Sequences: Do not repeatedly execute the same action or sequence of actions. Try to modify the action sequence because previous actions do not lead to success. 

## 38 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

4. Multiple Instances: There may be multiple instances of the same object, distinguished by an index following their names, e.g., Cabinet_2, Cabinet_3. You can explore these instances if you do not find the desired object in the current receptacle. 5. Reflection on History and Feedback: Use interaction history and feedback from the environment to inform your reasoning in <think> tags before choosing the next action. If the last action was invalid, reflect on the reason (such as not adhering to action rules or missing preliminary actions) and adjust your next action accordingly. \end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: EB-ALFRED Task Policy—User Message 

\begin{PromptText} ## Now the human instruction is: {instruction}. The action history: Step {i}, action id {id}, {action_name}, env feedback: { feedback} The current textual observation is: {observation_text} The attached images are, in order: 1. current synchronized simulator observation; 2. MemPrism optical memory view. Now it is your turn to take an action. Reason inside <think></think>, then choose ONE exact action name from the available list inside <action></action>. \end{PromptText} 

Prompt E.0: Mind2Web Task Policy 

\begin{PromptText} You are an intelligent agent in a web browsing environment. Your goal is to complete the user’s web task step by step. Each actionable element has a ref such as [ref= e12]. Choose actions only from refs in the current observation. First reason inside <reasoning></reasoning>. Then output exactly one JSON action inside <action></ action>. Allowed operations: CLICK: {"op":"CLICK","ref":"e12"} TYPE: {"op":"TYPE","ref":"e7","value":"text to type"} SELECT: {"op":"SELECT","ref":"e9","value":"option text"} Do not invent refs or output multiple actions. <image: MemPrism optical memory view> [Step {step_idx}] Current task: {goal} Current page snapshot (source={html_field}): {observation} 

## 39 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

> Recent expert trace: {recent_observation_and_expert_action_records} Action format: {"op":"CLICK","ref":"e12","value":null} {"op":"TYPE","ref":"e7","value":"text to type"} {"op":"SELECT","ref":"e9","value":"option text"} \end{PromptText}

E.4. View and environment action definitions 

Router selects 

𝑎 view  

> 𝑡

= (𝜏 𝑡 , 𝑤 𝑡 , 𝑐 𝑡 , 𝛾 𝑡 ) ∈ T × W × O × G , (E.1) where 

T = {TemporalTrace , ActionEffect , EntityState , DependencyChain }, (E.2) 

W = {recent_short (6), recent_long (10 ), all }, (E.3) 

O = {all , exception , state_update , no_observed_change }, (E.4) 

G = {coarse , medium , fine }. (E.5) The implementation enumerates view type, time window, outcome filter, and granularity in that order. The 4 × 3 × 4 × 3 = 144 actions use the stable zero-based index 

𝑖 (𝑎 ) =  (𝑖 𝜏 · 3 + 𝑖 𝑤 ) · 4 + 𝑖 𝑐 

 · 3 + 𝑖 𝛾 . (E.6) The serialized action object is 

{"tau": "TemporalTrace|ActionEffect|EntityState| DependencyChain", "window": "recent_short|recent_long|all", "filter": "all|exception|state_update| no_observed_change", "gamma": "coarse|medium|fine" }

Legacy names such as timeline , action_outcome , state_table , and causal_chain are ac-cepted only as read-time aliases and serialize back to the four canonical names. Environment actions use separate benchmark contracts. ALFWorld returns one exact member of the current textual admissible-action set. EB-ALFRED returns one exact name from the scene-filtered skill list; the parser additionally canonicalizes any put down ... form to put down the object in hand when that action is available. Mind2Web returns one of CLICK , TYPE , or SELECT with a current element ref ; TYPE and SELECT also require value .

E.5. Parsing and validation 

Phi accepts a mapping or attempts to parse the substring from the first opening brace to the last closing brace in a text response. 

## 40 MemPrism: Task-Conditioned Relational Memory Views for Long-Horizon Agents 

ALFWorld extracts the text enclosed by <action> tags and applies the fixed admissible-action policy. EB-ALFRED matches in order by exact string, case-insensitive string, and normalized whitespace. Mind2Web accepts exactly one tagged JSON action, rejects unknown operations or references absent from the current snapshot, and scores the normalized operation, target reference, and value against the recorded human action. 

## 41