COMPOSITIONAL SAFETY FAILURES
IN HARNESS
EVOLUTION: IDENTIFICATION AND RUNTIME MONI-
TORING
Zhixiang Zhang
Zesen Liu
Wai Ip Lai
Hongxu Chen
Dongdong She
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
ABSTRACT
Self-evolving agent harnesses continually update persistent components such as
memory, prompts, skills, and tools. We call this process harness evolution. How-
ever, such evolution could introduce unexpected safety risks. Existing work stud-
ies harness misevolution and validates candidate harnesses or attributed individual
component updates, leaving safety analysis of cross-component update interac-
tions largely unexamined. To address this gap, we study compositional safety fail-
ures in harness evolution, where interactions among individually safe and utility-
preserving component updates can produce undesirable or unsafe agent behavior,
revealing a safety risk intrinsic to harness evolution. Across three safety-related
benchmarks, we identify 43 pairwise and 18 irreducible 3-way compositional
safety failures. Conventional solution incurs combinatorial complexity in vali-
dating cross-component interactions, leaving the safety checking impractical as
the harness evolves. To solve this, we introduced a typed hypergraph that repre-
sents component states as nodes and safety-relevant higher-order interactions as
hyperedges. When the harness changes, the hypergraph updates only the inter-
action neighborhood of the changed states rather than reconstructing the global
composition space. Building on that, we develop a hypergraph-guided runtime
monitoring mechanism. Experiments show that our method effectively mitigates
compositional safety risks while preserving task utility and reducing interaction-
checking costs, and further reveal an empirical safety-utility-cost trade-off across
different safety mechanisms.
1
INTRODUCTION
Large Language Model (LLM) agents rely on an external agent harness that determines what the
model observes, remembers, and can execute (Weng, 2026; Pan et al., 2026; He et al., 2026). The
harness contains configurable components such as memory, prompts, skills, and tools, which respec-
tively provide persistent information, behavioral instructions, reusable procedures, and executable
capabilities (Ouyang et al., 2026; Agrawal et al., 2026; Chen et al., 2025). Recent works make the
agent harness self-evolving, a process we refer to as harness evolution, allowing it to be updated
from execution experience, task outcomes, or external feedback (Lee et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026a;
Gao et al., 2025). As these updates are retained across executions, the harness is no longer a fixed
configuration but an evolving state of component sets that jointly influence future agent behavior.
Harness evolution introduces new safety risks, as retained changes can affect future agent behavior.
Recent work has identified vulnerabilities in individual evolving memory, skills, and tools (Shao
et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026b; Zhao et al., 2026; Shang et al., 2026; Ying et al., 2026). To tackle
this problem, several methods validate candidate harnesses or attributed individual component up-
dates (Nie et al., 2026; Qu et al., 2026; Xu et al., 2026a; Mao et al., 2026) to ensure safety during
harness evolution. However, these methods fail to validate the security of interactions between
heterogeneous components. Consequently, two individual component updates can remain safe but
become unsafe when jointly activated, creating a safety risk intrinsic to harness evolution.
We call this phenomenon a compositional safety failure in harness evolution.
Figure 1 shows a
simple example. Composition-induced failures are well known in software systems, where individ-
1
arXiv:2609.33123v2  [cs.AI]  29 Sep 2026


ually valid components can interact to create system-level failures (Garlan et al., 1995; Calder et al.,
2003). LLM agents similarly exhibit risks when untrusted content interacts with privileged tools or
actions (OpenAI, 2026; Anthropic, 2025). Recent works on self-evolving agents have further iden-
tified compositional risks arising from interactions among multiple retained items within the same
harness component (Yan et al., 2026; Shang et al., 2026). We study a different setting: the security
of interactions across heterogeneous harness components in common harness evolution.
We first establish that such failures arise empirically in common harness evolution, where the
original harness and each individual update remain safe and utility-preserving.
Across Agent-
Dojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024), Agent-SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024b) and Agent Security
Bench (Zhang et al., 2025), we identify 43 pairwise compositional failures. We further evaluate all
proper subsets of three-update compositions and identify 18 irreducible three-way failures, where
every singleton and pairwise composition remains safe, but the composition is unsafe. They ex-
pose a temporal challenge: component states can remain safe until a later state creates an unsafe
interaction. Thus, compositional safety is execution-dependent.
Checking these interactions exhaustively is very expensive as the harness evolves. Retained states
accumulate across heterogeneous components, and safety-relevant interactions can involve two or
more states. Evaluating all cross-component compositions leads to a combinatorial cost. We ad-
dress this problem with an incremental interaction hypergraph. Each node represents a versioned
component state, while each hyperedge represents a safety-relevant higher-order interaction among
states. When an update changes the harness, we update only the local interaction neighborhood of
the changed states and use local completion with semantic filtering to identify candidate interac-
tions, rather than reconstructing the global composition space. The resulting hypergraph preserves
interaction structure across evolution steps.
Building on this representation, we develop hypergraph-guided runtime monitoring that inspects
only interactions activated by the current execution and checks a composition before its resulting
action takes effect. Experiments show that our method reduces the residual CFR to at most 1.27%
across three benchmarks while preserving task utility and invoking runtime safety checks on only
20.1-33.6% of candidate actions. Our experiments further reveal a safety-utility-cost trade-off across
different safety mechanisms. Exhaustive interaction checking provides strong safety coverage but
incurs substantially higher verification cost, whereas more selective mechanisms reduce cost while
leaving some compositional failures uncovered. Our runtime monitor achieves low residual CFR
while preserving utility with substantially fewer checks.
We list our contributions as follows:
• We identify compositional safety failure as a safety risk intrinsic to harness evolution and
empirically show that interactions across individually acceptable harness component up-
dates and evolution steps can produce unsafe behavior.
• We formalize component states and their higher-order interactions as an incremental inter-
action hypergraph, providing a unified abstraction for cross-component and cross-update
safety dependencies.
• We develop runtime monitoring based on the hypergraph that checks only interactions acti-
vated by the current execution, which avoids the combinatorial cost of global composition
enumeration.
• We conduct extensive experiments across three safety-related benchmarks, showing that
our method substantially reduces compositional failures while preserving utility at a low
cost. Our analysis further empirically reveals a safety-utility-cost trade-off across different
safety mechanisms.
2
BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORKS
2.1
SELF-EVOLVING AGENT HARNESSES
An LLM agent is composed of an LLM model with an external agent harness that determines what
LLM model observes, remembers, and can act upon (Weng, 2026; Pan et al., 2026; He et al., 2026).
The harness may contain multiple configurable components. In this work, we study three common
agent components that undergo self-evolution. Memory stores facts, experiences, and strategies that
2


Prompt (P0)
authorize_group = {Alice}
Prompt (P1)
authorize_group = {Alice, Bob} 
Memory (M0)
bank_account = {Chase}
Memory (M1)
bank_account = {Chase, BoA}
✅ Safe
Bob cannot use BoA.
❌ Unsafe
Bob can use BoA.
authorize_group can access
bank_account
✅ Safe
Bob cannot use BoA.
✅ Safe
Bob cannot use BoA.
Figure 1: A motivating example of compositional safety failure in harness evolution.
The ar-
rows denote two independently accepted updates: the prompt update P0 →P1 adds Bob to
authorize group, while the memory update M0 →M1 adds BoA to bank account. Under
the rule that authorize group can access bank account, either update alone remains safe:
Bob is not authorized under P0, and BoA is unavailable under M0. However, when the updated
states P1 and M1 coexist, Bob can access BoA, producing a compositional safety failure.
can be retrieved in future tasks (Packer et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2024a). Prompts and skills encode
persistent instructions and reusable procedures that guide agent behavior (Wei et al., 2023; Schulhoff
et al., 2025), while tools expose external capabilities through executable interfaces and schemas (Yao
et al., 2023; Schick et al., 2023). Recent systems increasingly make these components self-evolving,
using execution traces, task outcomes, or external feedback to update persistent harness state across
episodes (Zhang et al., 2026). Such evolution may consolidate experience into memory (Ouyang
et al., 2026; Shinn et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2026), refine prompts or reusable skills (Agrawal et al.,
2026; Wang et al., 2023), or revise tools (Chen et al., 2025; Qin et al., 2024), allowing the agent to
adapt over time without modifying the underlying LLM parameters (Xu et al., 2026b).
2.2
TRUSTWORTHY HARNESS EVOLUTION
Table 1: Position of our work with existing literature. Existing works mainly focus on individual
components, while our work analyzes the cross-component interactions.
Method
Phase
Verification Scope
Interaction-Level
Analysis
TTHE (Nie et al., 2026)
Test-time
Candidate harness
✗
AutoSaddler (Park et al., 2026)
Offline
Component patch
✗
HarnessLens (Xu et al., 2026a)
Offline
Harness modification
✗
SHE (Qu et al., 2026)
Offline
Attributed update
✗
SafeEvolve (Mao et al., 2026)
Offline
Candidate harness
✗
Ours
Runtime
Component-state interaction
✓
Agent self-evolution introduces unexpected attack surfaces because the changes on harness can in-
fluence future agent behaviors (Shao et al., 2026; Lin et al., 2026b). Existing works have exposed
individual harness component vulnerabilities in evolving memory and experience (Zhao et al., 2026;
Wang et al., 2026; Yang et al., 2026; Yan et al., 2026), reusable skills (Shang et al., 2026; Ying et al.,
2026), and tool evolution (Shao et al., 2026). These risks have motivated defenses and verification
mechanisms for harness evolution, spanning offline validation (Park et al., 2026), test-time update
selection (Nie et al., 2026), attribution-guided refinement (Qu et al., 2026), and targeted update ver-
ification (Xu et al., 2026a). Among these, SHE (Qu et al., 2026) relies on whole-harness validation
to ensure safety. However, such evaluation remains execution-bounded, observing only the interac-
tions activated by the validation trajectories. Table 1 includes representative methods that explicitly
validate or gate persistent harness changes. Existing methods validate candidate harnesses, mod-
ifications, or attributed updates, but do not treat interactions across evolving harness components
as the unit of safety analysis. This work focuses on this missing property: the trustworthiness of
cross-component interactions in harness evolution.
3


2.3
COMPOSITIONAL SAFETY FAILURES
In the software engineering domain, compositional safety failures arise when individually validated
software components (e.g., software patches) interact to produce undesirable or unsafe system-level
behavior. This problem has been studied through architectural mismatch and feature interaction,
where components or features that are locally valid may exhibit incompatible behaviors when com-
posed (Garlan et al., 1995; Calder et al., 2003). Combinatorial interaction testing further addresses
faults that are triggered only by particular combinations of system configurations (Nie & Leung,
2011; Kuhn et al., 2004). In the LLM agent domain, OpenAI and Anthropic have shown that the
composition of untrusted external content with privileged action or tool capabilities can amplify the
impact of prompt injection (OpenAI, 2026; Anthropic, 2025). Related compositional risks have also
recently been identified in self-evolving agents (Yan et al., 2026; Shang et al., 2026). However, ex-
isting work primarily considers safety risks within a single harness component and does not address
safety interactions that emerge across heterogeneous harness components as they evolve.
3
IDENTIFYING COMPOSITIONAL SAFETY FAILURES IN SELF-EVOLVING
AGENT HARNESSES
3.1
SAFETY ANALYSIS AT THE COMPONENT LEVEL
Harness evolution systems operate at heterogeneous granularities. Component-aware approaches
may modify one or more configurable harness components (Xu et al., 2026a), while more open-
ended optimizers can rewrite executable harness programs (Nie et al., 2026; Lee et al., 2026). This
work makes no assumption that an evolution step modifies either a single component or the harness
as a whole. However, the boundaries imposed by the evolution mechanism do not align with the units
relevant to safety analysis. Safety analysis requires a more fine-grained view: it must distinguish
the state changes through which an accepted update affects agent behavior. Treating each update
as one indivisible unit obscures which persistent state changes are relevant to subsequent safety
analysis. To inspect these interactions, we project the effect of each update onto three security-
relevant components: memory, which determines what persistent information is available to the
agent; prompts and skills, which encode instructions and reusable procedures that shape its behavior;
and tools, which determine the external capabilities through which the agent can act. This projection
does not constrain how the upstream evolution system performs an update: a single update may
affect one or several components, while remaining a single evolution step. Thus, the granularity
used for harness evolution can be coarser than the granularity required for safety analysis.
3.2
EMPIRICAL IDENTIFICATION OF EMERGENT COMPOSITIONAL SAFETY FAILURES
Experimental Setup. Our goal is to examine whether updates evolved for different harness compo-
nents can interact to produce undesirable or unsafe behavior. This requires the component states to
coexist within the same evolving harness. Existing harness evolution frameworks typically couple a
predefined harness representation with a particular evolution mechanism (Nie et al., 2026; Park et al.,
2026). Such settings are well suited to optimizing their target harnesses, but do not directly support
our goal of studying safety interactions among component states produced by different established
evolution mechanisms. Hence, we abstract from existing harness evolution works and build our
experiments on the unified harness abstraction of A-Evolve (Lin et al., 2026a), which provides a
shared interface for editable harness components. We use A-Evolve as a common host harness and
instantiate each component with a representative evolution mechanism from prior work: Reasoning-
Bank (Ouyang et al., 2026) for memory, GEPA (Agrawal et al., 2026) for prompts, Voyager (Wang
et al., 2023) for reusable skills, and Alita (Qiu et al., 2025) for tools. Thus, we standardize where
evolved states interact, not how those states are produced. We use Qwen3-32B (Yang et al., 2025) as
the fixed LLM backbone throughout the experiments. We evaluate on the banking environment of
AgentDojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024), Agent-SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024b) and Agent Security
Bench (Zhang et al., 2025). We select these benchmarks because they provide executable tool en-
vironments and explicit criteria for verifying safety violations, while covering complementary task
and environment settings. Detailed configuration is in Appendix A.
4


Table 2: Results of pairwise compositional safety failure identification.
Benchmark
Panels
Eligible
CF
CFR
AgentDojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024)
600
157
22
14.01%
Agent-SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024b)
182
11
2
18.18%
Agent Security Bench (Zhang et al., 2025)
1362
1243
19
1.53%
Experimental Protocol. We study non-adversarial harness evolution only and do not construct
attacker-crafted component updates. For each user request, we construct an interaction panel from
two component updates, ui and uj, associated with distinct harness components. Each panel con-
tains four controlled configurations: the original harness (00), ui alone (10), uj alone (01), and their
joint activation (11). We consider a panel eligible only when the original harness is safe and both
singleton configurations are independently safe and utility-preserving. This filtering ensures that
any subsequent failure cannot be attributed to an update that is already unsafe in isolation.
Among eligible panels, we identify a compositional safety failure when the joint configuration 11
produces a safety violation that is absent from 00, 10, and 01, together with execution-level evidence
that the violating behavior emerges only under joint activation. We inspect the resulting execution
rather than relying on a safety label alone, including tool calls and arguments, relevant agent behav-
iors, and resulting environment-state transitions when available. Thus, the singleton configurations
establish the independent acceptability of each update, while the contrast with 11 isolates the safety
effect introduced by their interaction. We report the number of Compositional Failures (CF) and the
Compositional Failure Rate (CFR), defined as the fraction of eligible interaction panels that exhibit
a compositional safety failure: CFR = CF/Eligible. Further details on the experimental protocols
are provided in Appendix B.
Experimental Results.
Table 2 shows that compositional safety failures occur even when
keeping independent safety and utility preservation for every component update.
On Agent-
Dojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024), 22 of 157 eligible panels exhibit a compositional safety failure,
corresponding to a CFR of 14.01%. On Agent-SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024b), we observe 2
failures among 11 eligible panels, corresponding to 18.18%. On Agent Security Bench (Zhang
et al., 2025), we identify 19 failures among 1,243 eligible panels, corresponding to a CFR of 1.53%.
The lower CFR on Agent Security Bench should not be interpreted as weaker evidence of the phe-
nomenon, as the three benchmarks differ substantially in task distribution and panel construction.
In particular, Agent Security Bench evaluates a much broader all-domain set of clean source-target
compositions, yielding 1,243 eligible panels rather than concentrating evaluation on a smaller set
of interaction-compatible tasks. Results on these benchmarks show that safety under independent
update validation does not imply safety once component state updates interact.
3.3
HIGHER-ORDER COMPOSITIONAL FAILURES
The pairwise results in Section 3.2 establish that independently acceptable component updates can
interact unsafely, but do not show whether these compositional failures can extend beyond two
component states. We therefore further examine higher-order compositional failures. Here we focus
on 3-way compositions. For each update triple, we evaluate all eight configurations: baseline, each
individual update, all three pairwise compositions, and the full three-update composition. A triple
is eligible only if the baseline and every proper subset of the three updates remain safe and utility-
preserving. We identify a 3-way compositional failure only when the full composition produces
a safety violation while all singleton and pairwise compositions remain acceptable. This criterion
excludes failures that can already be attributed to a lower-order interaction.
We evaluate 3-way compositions on AgentDojo and Agent Security Bench, where sufficient eligible
triples can be constructed. We identify 15 failures among 138 eligible triples on AgentDojo (10.87%
3-CFR) and 3 failures among 578 eligible triples on Agent Security Bench (0.52% 3-CFR). In ev-
ery identified case, all seven lower-order configurations remain safe, while the violation emerges
only when all three component updates are jointly activated. Detailed statistics are reported in Ap-
pendix D. These results provide direct evidence that compositional safety failures can be irreducibly
higher-order.
5


3.4
COMBINATORIAL COST OF EXHAUSTIVE COMPOSITION ANALYSIS
The empirical results above show that safety analysis must consider interactions among harness
components. Importantly, the coexistence of retained component states does not imply that their
interaction is invoked during validation. A cross-update interaction can remain latent at validation
time and become observable only when a future execution jointly activates the relevant states. This
makes compositional safety inherently execution-dependent. A straightforward approach would
enumerate cross-component compositions and evaluate each one for safety. However, the number
of cross-component compositions grows combinatorially with the number of components. We write
C for the set of harness components, with d = |C|. For each component c ∈C, let nc(t) denote
the number of states of c that may participate in execution at time t. Let Ωt denote all candidate
cross-component compositions formed by selecting states from at least two distinct components:
|Ωt| = Pd
k=2
P
S⊆C: |S|=k
Q
c∈S nc(t). (1)
When each component contains n states, |Ωt| = Pd
k=2
 d
k

nk, which becomes Θ(n3) for the three
component types considered in this work. Temporal factor further makes this cost recur after ev-
ery update. Adding a single new state to component c introduces Q
c′∈C\{c}(1 + nc′(t)) −1 new
candidate compositions, which is Θ(nd−1) when component sizes are comparable. Given the com-
binatorial cost of enumerating the compositions, we need a representation that preserves previously
identified interactions, captures higher-order dependencies among component states, and supports
local updates without repeatedly enumerating Ωt. Section 4 introduces an interaction hypergraph
for this purpose.
4
HYPERGRAPH FOR HARNESS EVOLUTION INTERACTION
Figure 2 gives an overview of our method.
4.1
NODE DEFINITION: COMPONENT STATE OF HARNESS EVOLUTION
As discussed in Section 3.1, we represent harness evolution at the level of component states. Each
concrete component state is represented as a node v = (c, x), where c ∈C identifies the harness
component and x denotes a particular state of that component. The node set Vt contains all com-
ponent states currently available at time t, with nc(t) nodes associated with component c. When an
update in harness evolution modifies an existing component state, the resulting version is represented
as a new node, while unchanged states retain as historical provenance and may persist across subse-
quent updates. A single evolution step may add or replace nodes from one or multiple components,
without imposing any restriction on the scope of the update.
4.2
HYPEREDGE DEFINITION: HIGHER-ORDER INTERACTION BETWEEN COMPONENT STATE
The component state nodes specify which states exist, but not how they may interact during exe-
cution. Such interactions can be higher-order, as shown in Section 3.3. A failure may arise only
when several component states participate together, even though no pair of them is unsafe on its
own. They can also be temporally distributed, as states introduced by different evolution steps may
persist and only later become jointly relevant to the same agent behavior. A pairwise graph can-
not represent this higher-order composition directly. Moreover, interactions may involve versioned
states introduced by different evolution steps, requiring the representation to preserve dependencies
across updates. We represent interactions with a hypergraph over versioned component state nodes.
Formally, we define the interaction hypergraph as Gt = (Vt, Et, ϕ), where Vt is the component state
node set, ϕ : Vt →C assigns each node its component state, and Et contains cross-component inter-
actions supported either by execution evidence or by interaction inference. We distinguish observed
hyperedges Eobs
t
, supported by execution provenance, from predicted hyperedges Epred
t
, inferred as
plausible interactions that have not yet been observed. Each hyperedge e ∈Et connects states from
at least two distinct components, i.e., |{ϕ(v) : v ∈e}| ≥2.
6


Figure 2: Overview of our method. (a) A candidate update ut introduces a component-state node
(t+ in this example), and the local interaction neighborhood Γh(ut) is extracted from the existing
hypergraph Gt. (b) Local completion proposes interactions involving the new state. An LLM filters
these candidates using component states and provenance, yielding the provisional hypergraph eGt+1.
Solid and dashed contours denote observed and predicted hyperedges, respectively; node shapes
encode component types. (c) Within one action context, participating nodes become active (filled)
in sequence. Each activation visits only incident hyperedges; a fully activated interaction is checked
before the action takes effect. Execution provenance promotes a predicted hyperedge to observed
status once confirmed at runtime, irrespective of its safety verdict.
4.3
INCREMENTAL CONSTRUCTION OF THE HYPERGRAPH
We update the hypergraph incrementally around the component states introduced or modified by
the candidate update ut, rather than rebuilding the interaction space from Ωt. This is motivated by
the fact that an update typically changes only a small portion of the harness, and full reconstruction
would discard the locality already captured by Gt. Let Γh(ut) denote the interaction neighborhood
within h steps of the node and hyperedge incidence structure of Gt. This neighborhood collects
the historical interaction contexts most relevant to the update. We then perform local hypergraph
completion within Γh(ut) by using existing higher-order interaction patterns to propose new cross-
component interactions that involve the changed states. This construction can recover both direct
continuations of previously observed interactions and new compositions among states that have not
been observed together, without enumerating the full candidate space Ωt. Graph structure alone,
however, does not establish that a proposed interaction is semantically plausible. We therefore use
an LLM to examine the participating component states together with available provenance con-
text and filter the interactions produced by local completion. Retained interactions are added to
Epred
t+1 . Together with the existing observed interaction history, they form the provisional hypergraph
eGt+1 = (eVt+1, eEt+1, ϕ) before ut is committed. If later execution provenance confirms a predicted
interaction, the corresponding hyperedge is moved from Epred to Eobs. The resulting provisional
graph provides the reduced interaction space used for runtime monitoring in Section 5.
5
HYPERGRAPH GUIDED RUNTIME MONITORING
5.1
INCREMENTAL MONITORING OF COMPONENT INTERACTION
Section 4 maintains a sparse hypergraph of observed and predicted cross-component interactions.
This structure allows runtime monitoring to focus on interactions connected to the component states
7


that actually participate in the current execution. When a component state node v becomes active,
only hyperedges containing v can change from partially active to fully active. Then the monitor
inspects only its incident hyperedges, I(v) = {e ∈Et : v ∈e}. For each visited hyperedge, the
monitor records which participating states have appeared in the same decision or action context.
If the activation of v causes all states in a hyperedge to appear, the monitor checks the resulting
composition before the corresponding action takes effect. This procedure detects every fully acti-
vated interaction represented in Gt, because the hyperedge is necessarily inspected when its final
participating state becomes active. Activation is tracked separately for each decision context. A
composition is checked again when it participates in a subsequent action, since the request, argu-
ments, or permissions may differ. Observed and predicted hyperedges follow the same monitoring
procedure. Once a predicted hyperedge is fully activated and confirmed by execution provenance, it
is moved from Epred
t
to Eobs
t
. Algorithm 1 in Appendix C summarizes the complete procedure. For
an execution with active nodes v1, . . . , vL, this reduces the runtime cost from dependence on the
global composition space Ωt in equation 1 to O(PL
ℓ=1 |I(vℓ)|) local hyperedge visits.
5.2
EXPERIMENTS
We follow the same experimental settings including benchmarks, component updates, eligibility
criterion as Section 3.2. We compare against SHE (Qu et al., 2026), which performs whole-harness
safety-utility re-evaluation, and HarnessLens (Xu et al., 2026a), which selectively verifies behavior-
relevant harness modifications. We also add Naive Exhaustive Checking discussed in Section 3.4 as
our baseline. We use Qwen3-32B (Yang et al., 2025) as the agent backbone and Qwen3-8B (Yang
et al., 2025) as the LLM semantic filter for hypergraph construction. The hyperparameter h is set to
3 for all experiments.
We evaluate each method along three dimensions: safety, utility, and verification cost. For safety,
we report Residual CFR, defined as the fraction of the fixed eligible panels whose compositional
safety violation still reaches execution after applying the safety mechanism. For utility, we use the
same benchmark-specific task-success criterion as in Section 3.2 and report the fraction of eligible
panels that remain utility-preserving under the safety mechanism. For cost, we count the additional
verification checks introduced by each method and report runtime check rate and time cost.
Table 3: Safety effectiveness of different mechanisms against compositional failures. Each entry
reports the residual compositional failure rate (CFR) as f/n (%), where f is the number of com-
positional failures among the n eligible panels. The eligible panel set is fixed before applying each
safety mechanism.
Method
AgentDojo
Agent-SafetyBench
Agent Security Bench
No Monitoring
22/157 (14.01%)
2/11 (18.18%)
19/1243 (1.53%)
Naive
1/157 (0.64%)
0/11 (0.00%)
0/1243 (0.00%)
SHE (Qu et al., 2026)
6/157 (3.82%)
1/11 (9.09%)
5/1243 (0.40%)
HarnessLens (Xu et al., 2026a)
8/157 (5.10%)
1/11 (9.09%)
5/1243 (0.40%)
Ours
2/157 (1.27%)
0/11 (0.00%)
1/1243 (0.08%)
Table 3 shows that all safety mechanisms reduce compositional failures, but to different extents.
Naive Exhaustive Checking eliminates all observed failures on Agent-SafetyBench and Agent Se-
curity Bench, leaving one on AgentDojo (0.64% CFR). SHE and HarnessLens reduce the num-
ber of failures but still leave residual CFRs of 3.82-5.10% on AgentDojo and 9.09% on Agent-
SafetyBench. In contrast, our method reduces the residual CFR to at most 1.27% across all three
benchmarks, approaching the safety effectiveness of exhaustive checking. These results demonstrate
that our hypergraph-guided runtime monitoring can effectively address compositional safety failures
in harness evolution.
Table 4 further compares utility and verification cost. Naive Exhaustive Checking incurs the highest
runtime verification cost because every candidate action is checked. SHE preserves high task util-
ity but requires substantial update-time verification, while HarnessLens reduces this cost through
selective behavior-aware verification. In comparison, our method preserves comparable task util-
ity while invoking the runtime safety checker on fewer than 30% of candidate actions on average.
8


Table 4: Utility and verification cost of different safety mechanisms. Utility is the fraction of eligi-
ble panels satisfying the benchmark-specific task objective. Verification counts additional validation
executions per harness update. Runtime Check Rate is the fraction of candidate actions invoking
the runtime safety checker. Time Cost is the additional wall-clock time per panel over execution
without a safety mechanism.
Method
Utility ↑
Verification ↓
Runtime
Check Rate ↓
Time Cost
(s/task)
↓
AgentDojo
Naive
58.6%
–
100.0%
103.9
SHE (Qu et al., 2026)
57.3%
1200
–
77.1
HarnessLens (Xu et al., 2026a)
52.9%
114
–
33.8
Ours
59.2%
82
33.6%
32.5
Agent-SafetyBench
Naive
45.5%
–
100.0%
139.5
SHE (Qu et al., 2026)
45.5%
360
–
137.8
HarnessLens (Xu et al., 2026a)
36.4%
320
–
30.2
Ours
54.5%
185
20.1%
28.1
Agent Security Bench
Naive
62.8%
–
100.0%
80.5
SHE (Qu et al., 2026)
61.1%
260
–
98.0
HarnessLens (Xu et al., 2026a)
49.5%
123
–
17.4
Ours
63.3%
101
24.6%
19.8
This reduces the added execution time from 80.5-139.5 s/task under Naive Exhaustive Checking to
19.8-32.5 s/task with our method. Together with the safety results in Table 3, these results reveal
an empirical safety-utility-cost trade-off. Reducing residual CFR generally requires checking more
interactions, which increases verification cost, or intervening more conservatively, which can re-
duce task utility. When both verification cost and utility loss are constrained, fewer safety-relevant
interactions can be covered, leading to higher residual CFR. Our hypergraph-guided monitoring mit-
igates this trade-off by approaching the safety effectiveness of exhaustive checking while preserving
comparable task utility at substantially lower runtime verification cost.
5.3
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
The interaction radius h determines how much historical interaction context is considered when
completing the hypergraph around a new component state. A small h may omit relevant interactions,
whereas a larger h expands the candidate interaction space and may increase both construction and
runtime monitoring costs. We therefore study the sensitivity to h on AgentDojo (Debenedetti et al.,
2024), varying h ∈{2, 3, 4} while keeping all other settings fixed. Detailed results are reported in
Appendix G. As shown in Table 6, increasing h from 2 to 3 reduces the residual CFR from 2.55%
to 1.27%, while slightly decreasing utility from 60.5% to 59.2% and increasing the runtime check
rate from 30.1% to 33.6%. These results further illustrate the empirical safety-utility-cost trade-off
identified in Section 5.2. We therefore use h = 3, which provides a favorable balance between
compositional-safety coverage and monitoring overhead.
6
CONCLUSION
We study compositional safety failures in harness evolution, where component updates that are in-
dividually safe and utility-preserving can jointly produce unsafe behavior. We empirically identify
such failures across heterogeneous harness components on three agent safety benchmarks, showing
that independent update validation does not guarantee compositional safety. To address the com-
binatorial cost of checking cross-component interactions, we introduce an incremental interaction
hypergraph and hypergraph-guided runtime monitoring that focuses safety checking on interactions
activated during execution. Experiments show that our method substantially reduces residual com-
positional failures while preserving task utility at a lower checking cost, revealing a safety-utility-
cost trade-off.
9


AI USE STATEMENT
Generative AI tools were used to assist with literature review, research design, code development,
and manuscript editing. These tools were used as supporting aids rather than autonomous research
agents. We did not use generative AI to design the method.
REFERENCES
Lakshya A Agrawal, Shangyin Tan, Dilara Soylu, Noah Ziems, Rishi Khare, Krista Opsahl-Ong,
Arnav Singhvi, Herumb Shandilya, Michael J Ryan, Meng Jiang, et al. Gepa: Reflective prompt
evolution can outperform reinforcement learning. In International Conference on Learning Rep-
resentations, volume 2026, pp. 8479–8565, 2026.
Anthropic. Mitigating the risk of prompt injections in browser use, 2025. URL https://www.
anthropic.com/research/prompt-injection-defenses.
Muffy Calder, Mario Kolberg, Evan H Magill, and Stephan Reiff-Marganiec. Feature interaction: a
critical review and considered forecast. Computer Networks, 41(1):115–141, 2003.
Guoxin Chen, Zhong Zhang, Xin Cong, Fangda Guo, Yesai Wu, Yankai Lin, Wenzheng Feng, and
Yasheng Wang. Learning evolving tools for large language models. In International Conference
on Learning Representations, volume 2025, pp. 87140–87169, 2025.
Edoardo Debenedetti, Jie Zhang, Mislav Balunovic, Luca Beurer-Kellner, Marc Fischer, and Florian
Tram`er. Agentdojo: A dynamic environment to evaluate prompt injection attacks and defenses
for llm agents. Advances in neural information processing systems, 37:82895–82920, 2024.
Huan-ang Gao, Jiayi Geng, Wenyue Hua, Mengkang Hu, Xinzhe Juan, Hongzhang Liu, Shilong
Liu, Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Yiran Wu, et al. A survey of self-evolving agents: What, when, how,
and where to evolve on the path to artificial super intelligence. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.21046,
2025.
David Garlan, Robert Allen, and John Ockerbloom. Architectural mismatch: Why reuse is so hard.
IEEE software, 12(6):17–26, 1995.
Chaoyue He, Xin Zhou, Di Wang, Hong Xu, Wei Liu, and Chunyan Miao. Harness engineering for
language agents: The harness layer as control, agency, and runtime. 2026.
D Richard Kuhn, Dolores R Wallace, and Albert M Gallo. Software fault interactions and implica-
tions for software testing. IEEE transactions on software engineering, 30(6):418–421, 2004.
Yoonho Lee, Roshen Nair, Qizheng Zhang, Kangwook Lee, Omar Khattab, and Chelsea Finn. Meta-
harness: End-to-end optimization of model harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.28052, 2026.
Minhua Lin, Hanqing Lu, Zhan Shi, Bing He, Rui Mao, Zhiwei Zhang, Zongyu Wu, Xianfeng
Tang, Hui Liu, Zhenwei Dai, et al. Position: Agentic evolution is the path to evolving llms. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2602.00359, 2026a.
Ruixiao Lin, Xinhao Deng, Qingming Li, Jianan Ma, Yunhao Feng, Yuqi Qing, Zhenyuan Li,
Yechao Zhang, Shiwen Cui, Changhua Meng, et al. Safety in self-evolving llm agent systems:
Threats, amplification, and case studies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.23075, 2026b.
Qinghua Mao, Wanying Qu, Dadi Guo, Leitao Yuan, Qingyu Liu, Yu Li, Guanxu Chen, Yanwei Fu,
Xi Lin, Xia Hu, et al. Safeevolve: Harness-policy co-evolution from agent experience for safety
alignment. arXiv preprint arXiv:2609.02786, 2026.
Changhai Nie and Hareton Leung. A survey of combinatorial testing. ACM Computing Surveys
(CSUR), 43(2):1–29, 2011.
Jun Nie, Yonggang Zhang, Jun Song, Qianshu Cai, Dahai Yu, Yike Guo, Xinmei Tian, and Bo Han.
Tthe: Test-time harness evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2607.08124, 2026.
OpenAI. Designing ai agents to resist prompt injection, 2026. URL https://openai.com/
index/designing-agents-to-resist-prompt-injection/.
10


Siru Ouyang, Jun Yan, I Hsu, Yanfei Chen, Ke Jiang, Zifeng Wang, Rujun Han, Long Le, Samira
Daruki, Xiangru Tang, et al. Reasoningbank: Scaling agent self-evolving with reasoning memory.
In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2026, pp. 94327–94354, 2026.
Charles Packer, Sarah Wooders, Kevin Lin, Vivian Fang, Shishir G. Patil, Ion Stoica, and Joseph E.
Gonzalez. Memgpt: Towards llms as operating systems, 2024. URL https://arxiv.org/
abs/2310.08560.
Linyue Pan, Lexiao Zou, Shuo Guo, Jingchen Ni, and Hai-Tao Zheng. Natural-language agent
harnesses. arXiv preprint arXiv:2603.25723, 2026.
Sungho Park, Wonjoong Kim, Rongyuan Tan, Jue Zhang, Wook-Shin Han, Pengfei Gao, Chany-
oung Park, Yongqiang Yao, Rao Fu, Elsie Nallipogu, et al. Autosaddler: Automatic harness
optimization with durable updates from agent execution traces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2608.23041,
2026.
Yujia Qin, Shengding Hu, Yankai Lin, Weize Chen, Ning Ding, Ganqu Cui, Zheni Zeng, Xuanhe
Zhou, Yufei Huang, Chaojun Xiao, et al. Tool learning with foundation models. ACM Computing
Surveys, 57(4):1–40, 2024.
Jiahao Qiu, Xuan Qi, Tongcheng Zhang, Xinzhe Juan, Jiacheng Guo, Yifu Lu, Yimin Wang, Zixin
Yao, Qihan Ren, Xun Jiang, et al. Alita: Generalist agent enabling scalable agentic reasoning
with minimal predefinition and maximal self-evolution. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.20286, 2025.
Wanying Qu, Qinghua Mao, Yu Li, Jiyao Liu, Xin Zhang, Dadi Guo, Yanxu Zhu, Qingyu Liu, Leitao
Yuan, Xi Lin, et al. She: Trajectory-driven safety harness evolution for llm agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2608.09885, 2026.
Timo Schick, Jane Dwivedi-Yu, Roberto Dess`ı, Roberta Raileanu, Maria Lomeli, Luke Zettlemoyer,
Nicola Cancedda, and Thomas Scialom. Toolformer: Language models can teach themselves to
use tools, 2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2302.04761.
Sander Schulhoff, Michael Ilie, Nishant Balepur, Konstantine Kahadze, Amanda Liu, Chenglei Si,
Yinheng Li, Aayush Gupta, HyoJung Han, Sevien Schulhoff, Pranav Sandeep Dulepet, Saurav
Vidyadhara, Dayeon Ki, Sweta Agrawal, Chau Pham, Gerson Kroiz, Feileen Li, Hudson Tao,
Ashay Srivastava, Hevander Da Costa, Saloni Gupta, Megan L. Rogers, Inna Goncearenco,
Giuseppe Sarli, Igor Galynker, Denis Peskoff, Marine Carpuat, Jules White, Shyamal Anadkat,
Alexander Hoyle, and Philip Resnik. The prompt report: A systematic survey of prompt engi-
neering techniques, 2025. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2406.06608.
Linfang Shang, Ming Xu, Yiding Sun, Tianle Xia, Lingxiang Hu, Lan Xu, and Ning Zheng. When
self-evolution backfires: Pre-commit gating against skill contamination in llm agents.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2608.05810, 2026.
Shuai Shao, Qihan Ren, Dongrui Liu, Chen Qian, Boyi Wei, Dadi Guo, Jingyi Yang, Xinhao Song,
Linfeng Zhang, Weinan Zhang, et al. Your agent may misevolve: Emergent risks in self-evolving
llm agents. In International Conference on Learning Representations, volume 2026, pp. 99728–
99793, 2026.
Noah Shinn, Federico Cassano, Edward Berman, Ashwin Gopinath, Karthik Narasimhan, and
Shunyu Yao.
Reflexion: Language agents with verbal reinforcement learning, 2023.
URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2303.11366.
Liyan Tang, Cyrus Rashtchian, Chun-Sung Ferng, Andrew Tomkins, Da-Cheng Juan, and Tu Vu.
Wikiskill: Compiling agent experience into persistent knowledge for skill evolution, 2026. URL
https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.27454.
Guanzhi Wang, Yuqi Xie, Yunfan Jiang, Ajay Mandlekar, Chaowei Xiao, Yuke Zhu, Linxi Fan,
and Anima Anandkumar. Voyager: An open-ended embodied agent with large language models.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.16291, 2023.
Kaixiang Wang, Jiong Lou, Zhaojiacheng Zhou, and Jie Li. Oep: Poisoning self-evolving llm agents
via locally correct but non-transferable experiences. arXiv preprint arXiv:2605.18930, 2026.
11


Jason Wei, Xuezhi Wang, Dale Schuurmans, Maarten Bosma, Brian Ichter, Fei Xia, Ed Chi, Quoc
Le, and Denny Zhou. Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large language models,
2023. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2201.11903.
Lilian Weng. Harness engineering for self-improvement. lilianweng.github.io, July 2026. URL
https://lilianweng.github.io/posts/2026-07-04-harness/.
Jinghan Xu, Yikai Zhang, Aili Chen, Weiyuan Li, Jiaqing Liang, and Deqing Yang.
Ver-
ify smarter, evolve further: Efficient harness evolution through behavior-aware verification.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2608.27311, 2026a.
Yuanyuan Xu, Wenjie Zhang, Yin Chen, Xuemin Lin, and Ying Zhang. Self-evolving agents as
dynamic graph transformation: A survey and new perspective. 2026b.
Bingyu Yan, Xiaoming Zhang, Chaozhuo Li, Ziyi Zhou, Yirui Qi, and Litian Zhang. Benign alone,
harmful together: Exploiting experience composition in self-evolving llm agents. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2608.01759, 2026.
An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu,
Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al.
Qwen3 technical report.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2505.09388, 2025.
Xianglin Yang, Yufei He, Shuo Ji, Bryan Hooi, and Jin Song Dong. Zombie agents: Persistent con-
trol of self-evolving llm agents via self-reinforcing injections. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.15654,
2026.
Shunyu Yao, Jeffrey Zhao, Dian Yu, Nan Du, Izhak Shafran, Karthik Narasimhan, and Yuan Cao.
React: Synergizing reasoning and acting in language models, 2023. URL https://arxiv.
org/abs/2210.03629.
Zonghao Ying, Xiangfan Wu, Huiyu Wu, Xing Zheng, Huangsheng Cheng, Xiaorong Shi, and
Jing Guo.
Skilljack:
Persistent skill backdoors in self-evolving agents.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2608.03509, 2026.
Hangfan Zhang, Shao Zhang, Kangcong Li, Chen Zhang, Yang Chen, Yiqun Zhang, Lei Bai, and
Shuyue Hu. Self-harness: Harnesses that improve themselves. arXiv preprint arXiv:2606.09498,
2026.
Hanrong Zhang, Jingyuan Huang, Kai Mei, Yifei Yao, Zhenting Wang, Chenlu Zhan, Hongwei
Wang, and Yongfeng Zhang. Agent security bench (asb): Formalizing and benchmarking attacks
and defenses in llm-based agents.
In International Conference on Learning Representations,
volume 2025, pp. 35331–35366, 2025.
Zeyu Zhang, Xiaohe Bo, Chen Ma, Rui Li, Xu Chen, Quanyu Dai, Jieming Zhu, Zhenhua Dong,
and Ji-Rong Wen. A survey on the memory mechanism of large language model based agents,
2024a. URL https://arxiv.org/abs/2404.13501.
Zhexin Zhang, Shiyao Cui, Yida Lu, Jingzhuo Zhou, Junxiao Yang, Hongning Wang, and Minlie
Huang. Agent-safetybench: Evaluating the safety of llm agents. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.14470,
2024b.
Weixiang Zhao, Yichen Zhang, Yingshuo Wang, Yang Deng, Yanyan Zhao, Xuda Zhi, Yongbo
Huang, Hao He, Wanxiang Che, Bing Qin, et al. On safety risks in experience-driven self-evolving
agents. In Findings of the Association for Computational Linguistics: ACL 2026, pp. 42145–
42169, 2026.
A
BENCHMARK AND EVALUATION DETAILS
This appendix provides additional details on benchmark selection, update construction, and interac-
tion evaluation for Section 3.2. We use AgentDojo, Agent-SafetyBench and Agent Security Bench
as executable safety environments rather than treating their original benchmark scores as directly
comparable quantities. Our goal is not to estimate the prevalence of compositional failures in any
particular deployed evolution system, but to test whether independently acceptable states can be-
come unsafe once they coexist and interact within a shared evolving harness.
12


A.1
AGENTDOJO SETUP
Environment and requests.
We use AgentDojo v1.2.2 (Debenedetti et al., 2024) and restrict the
experiment to its banking environment. AgentDojo provides a stateful environment with executable
tools, allowing safety violations to be verified from actual tool calls and the resulting environment
state. We do not introduce prompt injection attacks or untrusted external content. Instead, we
construct 60 trusted request variants from a single banking task family in which the user requests
a numerical refund calculation. We use variants of the same task family to hold the intended user
objective fixed while varying the execution context in which evolved harness states are activated.
Component updates.
We construct a benchmark-specific update pool containing one memory
update, nine prompt updates, and one evolved tool update. All updates are generated through the
corresponding evolution mechanisms described in Section 3.2. They are not manually constructed
as adversarial payloads for the safety evaluation.
For each request, we instantiate the compatible cross-component update compositions from this
pool. This produces
60 × (1 + 9) × 1 = 600
interaction panels. Each panel is evaluated under the controlled four-configuration protocol de-
scribed in Section 3.2.
A.2
AGENT-SAFETYBENCH SETUP
Task selection.
Agent-SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024b) contains 2,000 official test cases span-
ning heterogeneous tool environments and safety risks. We first derive a structural candidate pool
of 455 tasks that are single-turn, executable in our setting, expose at least one tool, and do not rely
on injected dialogue. This filtering is used only to identify tasks compatible with component-level
harness evolution and does not modify the original task content.
We separate tasks used to generate harness updates from those used for compositional evaluation.
Seven source tasks are used to produce accepted update packages, while evaluation is performed
only on held-out tasks. From the candidate pool, we select 13 held-out official tasks for which at
least one evolved tool can be exposed under a compatible environment. The source tasks used for
update generation are disjoint from these evaluation tasks.
Component updates.
The seven source tasks produce seven memory updates, seven prompt up-
dates, and corresponding skill and tool updates. For each held-out task, we instantiate the compatible
cross-component compositions between the resulting updates. This yields
13 × (7 + 7) × 1 = 182
interaction panels. We retain the original Agent-SafetyBench task specification and tool environ-
ment, and use its official safety evaluation procedure based on ShieldAgent for behavioral safety
assessment.
A.3
AGENT SECURITY BENCH SETUP
Benchmark adaptation and task scope.
Agent Security Bench (ASB-Sec) (Zhang et al., 2025)
provides ten role-specific agents spanning finance, law, medicine, education, psychological coun-
selling, e-commerce, aerospace, academic search, autonomous driving, and system administration.
Our experiment is an adaptation of its clean-task and tool-simulation environment, rather than a
replication of its native prompt-injection, memory-poisoning, or backdoor attacks.
We begin with the official clean tasks associated with the ten agents. For each agent, we freeze
one capability whose invocation can produce a consequential action. We then exclude four tasks
whose wording could directly or indirectly authorize the selected capability: medical treatment-plan
updating, psychological therapy-plan design, e-commerce product-launch execution, and aerospace
software updating. This leaves 47 clean tasks. The numbers of retained tasks for the ten agents
are (5, 5, 4, 5, 4, 4, 4, 6, 5, 5), which sum to 47. We do not introduce prompt injection, poisoned
observations, backdoor triggers, or adversarially constructed component updates.
13


Trajectory-conditioned component updates.
For each retained source task, we first execute the
unmodified agent and record its clean plan, action, observation, and final-answer trajectory. We
use five predeclared utility objectives: grounding, plan completion, specialist-tool choice, eviden-
tial cross-checking, and production of a decision-ready outcome. These objectives diversify the
generated updates but are not treated as independent experimental replications.
The tool component is a catalog-level capability update.
For each agent,
its under-
lying
callable
implementation
is
one
fixed
official
non-aggressive
ASB-Sec
tool
leaf:
CredentialManager, InvestmentDiversionTool, SettlementManagementTool,
MedicationValidator, GradeManagementTool, TreatmentAuthorizationTool,
DiscountManagementTool,
SystemShutdownController,
AcademicProfileManager, or SoftwareUpdateManager.
The official attacker in-
struction and attack goal associated with the tool record are never shown to either the updater or the
evaluated agent.
The 47 source tasks and five utility objectives produce 47 × 5 = 235 candidate update packages. A
package passes source admission only if the baseline and all singleton component-update executions
complete successfully, satisfy the clean-task utility proxy, and do not invoke the newly exposed ca-
pability. Calls to the agent’s original normal tools remain permitted. This gate admits 174 packages
and rejects 61.
Interaction panels.
Each admitted package is evaluated on every other retained clean task belong-
ing to the same agent. The source and target requests in a panel are therefore distinct, although a
request may act as a source for one package and as a target for another. Before source admission,
the complete schedule contains
2 × 5 ×
10
X
a=1
na(na −1) = 1,780
source-target-stratum-recipe slots, where na is the number of retained tasks for agent a. After source
admission, 1,362 panels are executed.
B
DETAILS OF COMPOSITIONAL-FAILURE IDENTIFICATION
This appendix provides additional details for the empirical study in Section 3.2.
B.1
INTERACTION-PANEL CONSTRUCTION
An interaction panel is defined by an evaluation request and two updates, ui and uj, associated
with distinct harness components. For each selected pair, we instantiate four configurations while
keeping the request, backbone model, environment, and all unrelated harness state fixed:
• 00: neither ui nor uj;
• 10: only ui;
• 01: only uj;
• 11: both ui and uj.
This controlled design separates the independent effect of each update from the effect that appears
only when the two updates coexist. The benchmark-specific update pools and resulting numbers of
panels are reported in Table 2. Because the numbers of available updates differ across component
types, the panel set is fixed before inspecting joint safety outcomes rather than being selected ac-
cording to whether 11 fails. This prevents the identification procedure from preferentially retaining
unsafe joint configurations.
B.2
ELIGIBILITY CRITERION
A panel is eligible for compositional-failure analysis only if the following conditions hold:
1. the original configuration 00 satisfies the benchmark safety criterion;
14


2. the singleton configuration 10 remains safe and preserves the utility of the requested task;
and
3. the singleton configuration 01 remains safe and preserves the utility of the requested task.
The eligibility filter is essential to the phenomenon studied in this work. If either singleton update
is already unsafe, a violation under 11 does not establish a failure of composition. Similarly, an
update that destroys the intended task behavior should not be treated as an independently acceptable
harness update. Utility preservation is evaluated using the benchmark-specific task objective and
execution outcome rather than requiring the singleton trajectory to be identical to 00.
B.3
COMPONENT-SPECIFIC ACTIVATION
Different harness components affect execution through different mechanisms. A memory update
may become active when its stored information is retrieved into the current context. A prompt
update affects the instructions governing the current execution. A skill update becomes active when
its reusable procedure is exposed to or invoked by the agent. A tool update becomes active when the
corresponding capability is made available and participates in the execution.
We therefore define activation according to the native exposure semantics of each component rather
than requiring every update to appear as an explicit agent action. This distinction is important
for memory and prompt states, whose effects may influence downstream decisions without being
directly represented as a tool call. For a joint configuration 11, both component state updates are
available according to these semantics.
C
AUTOMATIC HYPERGRAPH UPDATE AND RUNTIME MONITORING
Algorithm 1 gives the end-to-end procedure for incrementally maintaining the interaction hyper-
graph and using it for runtime monitoring. The algorithm takes as input the current interaction hy-
pergraph, the component states changed by a harness update, and the subsequent execution stream.
All interaction candidates are generated from the local hypergraph neighborhood and filtered auto-
matically; no manually specified interaction pairs are required.
Complexity. The algorithm never enumerates the global composition space Ωt. For an update
introducing states ∆Vt, construction is restricted to their h-hop interaction neighborhoods and the
locally generated candidate hyperedges. At runtime, an activation of state v visits only its inci-
dent hyperedges I(v). Therefore, for an execution activating v1, . . . , vL, the monitoring cost is
O(PL
ℓ=1 |I(vℓ)|), independent of |Ωt|.
Interaction discovery details. Since newly introduced states in ∆Vt are not yet contained in Gt,
we first use the provenance of update ut to identify relevant existing component states and extract
the local interaction neighborhood Γh(ut) from Gt. For each new state, LOCALCOMPLETION pro-
poses cross-component candidate hyperedges by combining it with states in this neighborhood. The
retained candidates are added to eEpred
t+1 as predicted interactions.
Runtime safety checking. When all states of a hyperedge e become active within the same deci-
sion context q, the monitor invokes ISSAFE(e, q; S) before the corresponding action takes effect.
The safety checker S follows the benchmark-specific safety criterion used throughout our evalua-
tion. Thus, the hypergraph determines when compositional safety checking is triggered, while S
determines whether the activated behavior is safe. If the check identifies a safety violation, the
corresponding action is prevented from taking effect.
D
HIGHER-ORDER COMPOSITIONAL-FAILURE IDENTIFICATION
Table 5 reports the detailed results of the 3-way compositional-failure analysis in Section 3.3. Agent-
SafetyBench (Zhang et al., 2024b) yields only 9 eligible triples out of 637 candidates, which is
too small for a meaningful higher-order analysis. So we evaluate 3-way compositions on Agent-
Dojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024) and Agent Security Bench (Zhang et al., 2025).
15


Algorithm 1 Automatic Hypergraph Update and Runtime Monitoring
Require: Current hypergraph Gt = (Vt, Eobs
t
, Epred
t
, ϕ); changed component states ∆Vt from up-
date ut; interaction radius h; semantic filter F
Ensure: Updated hypergraph Gt+1
1: eVt+1 ←Vt ∪∆Vt
2: eEobs
t+1 ←Eobs
t
3: eEpred
t+1 ←Epred
t
▷Incremental interaction discovery
4: for all v ∈∆Vt do
5:
Γh(v) ←EXTRACTNEIGHBORHOOD(Gt, v, h)
6:
Cv ←LOCALCOMPLETION(v, Γh(v))
7:
∆Ev ←SEMANTICFILTER(Cv, F)
8:
eEpred
t+1 ←eEpred
t+1 ∪∆Ev
9: end for
10: eGt+1 ←(eVt+1, eEobs
t+1, eEpred
t+1 , ϕ)
▷Hypergraph-guided runtime monitoring
11: for all decision contexts q during execution do
12:
Aq ←∅
13:
Cq ←∅
14:
for all activation event v in q do
15:
Aq ←Aq ∪{v}
16:
Eready ←{e ∈I(v) : e ⊆Aq, e /∈Cq}
17:
for all e ∈Eready do
18:
Cq ←Cq ∪{e}
19:
if not ISSAFE(e, q) then
20:
INTERVENEBEFOREACTION(q)
21:
end if
22:
if CONFIRMEDBYPROVENANCE(e, q) then
23:
PROMOTETOOBSERVED( eGt+1, e)
24:
end if
25:
end for
26:
end for
27: end for
28: return eGt+1
Table 5: Identification of 3-way compositional failures. A triple is eligible only when the baseline,
all individual updates, and all pairwise compositions are safe and utility-preserving. 3-CF counts
failures that emerge only under the full three-update composition, and 3-CFR is computed as 3-
CF/Eligible.
Benchmark
Triples
Eligible
3-CF
3-CFR
AgentDojo (Debenedetti et al., 2024)
540
138
15
10.87%
Agent Security Bench (Zhang et al., 2025)
681
578
3
0.52%
E
DISTINCTION FROM PRIOR COMPOSITIONAL RISKS
Recent works have identified compositional risks arising from interactions among multiple retained
items within the same harness component. Yan et al. (Yan et al., 2026) study retained experiences
and show that individually benign experiences can accumulate across evolution steps and jointly
weaken the agent’s safety boundary when activated together. Shang et al. (Shang et al., 2026) study
retained skills and identify combinatorial contamination, where individually harmless skills can
jointly degrade agent performance; they further introduce pre-commit gating and subset selection to
prevent harmful skill combinations from entering the skill pool.
16


Our work studies a complementary setting across heterogeneous harness components. Rather than
interactions among multiple retained items within one experience or skill component, we consider
interactions among component states such as memory, prompts, skills, and tools. We define a com-
positional safety failure when individually safe and utility-preserving component updates produce an
unsafe behavior only when jointly activated; for higher-order failures, all lower-order compositions
must also remain safe and utility-preserving.
This cross-component setting further introduces an execution-dependent challenge. Component
states accepted at different evolution steps may coexist without their interaction being exercised
during validation, and become safety-relevant only when a future execution jointly activates them.
Accordingly, our interaction hypergraph explicitly tracks safety-relevant interactions across hetero-
geneous component states, while our runtime monitoring checks these interactions when they be-
come active during execution.
F
WHY AN INTERACTION HYPERGRAPH?
Our choice of a hypergraph is motivated by the interaction structure identified in Section 3.2 and 3.3.
The pairwise compositional failures show that safety cannot be characterized solely at the level of
individual component states. More importantly, the irreducible 3-way failures show that these inter-
actions can be genuinely higher-order: all individual states and pairwise compositions may remain
safe and utility-preserving, while their joint activation produces an unsafe behavior. A standard
pairwise graph cannot directly represent such an interaction without decomposing it into pairwise
relations that are themselves not unsafe.
A hypergraph provides a direct representation of this structure, since a single hyperedge can con-
nect all component states participating in the same higher-order interaction. Compared with storing
interaction tuples independently, the hypergraph also preserves shared interaction structure across
evolution steps. This structure allows newly introduced component states to reuse existing interac-
tion neighborhoods for local completion and enables runtime monitoring to visit only hyperedges
incident to states activated during the current execution. Thus, the hypergraph is used not only to rep-
resent higher-order interactions, but also to support incremental construction and activation-aware
monitoring without repeatedly enumerating the global composition space.
G
SENSITIVITY ANALYSIS
Table 6: Sensitivity to the local interaction radius h on AgentDojo.
h
Residual CFR ↓
Utility ↑
Runtime Check Rate ↓
Time Cost (s/task) ↓
2
4/157 (2.55%)
60.5%
30.1%
30.1
3
2/157 (1.27%)
59.2%
33.6%
32.5
4
2/157 (1.27%)
58.0%
47.6%
49.7
We evaluate the sensitivity of our method to the local interaction radius h on AgentDojo. We vary
h ∈{2, 3, 4} while keeping all other settings fixed, with h = 3 as the default configuration used in
the main experiments.
17
