Title: AMDKernelVault: Large-Scale Datasets and Agentic Training for AMD GPU Kernel Optimization

URL Source: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2609.12471v1

Published Time: Mon, 14 Sep 2026 00:36:00 GMT

Number of Pages: 24

Markdown Content:
# AMDKernelVault: Large-Scale Datasets and Agentic Training for AMD GPU Kernel Optimization 

Ji Liu ∗,† Saptarshi Majumder ∗,† Yiqing Huang ∗,† Wenwen Ouyang ∗,†

Umang Pandey Zeping Li Chushi Chen Zihao An Puyuan Yang Zekai Li Sina Rafati Ziqiong Liu Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma Dong Li Zicheng Liu Sharon Zhou Emad Barsoum Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 

> *

Equal contribution. †Correspondence: {liuji,sapmajum,Cody.Huang,viouyang}@amd.com .

Abstract 

We introduce AMDKernelVault, an open HIP and Triton kernel corpus and training frame-work for recent AMD CDNA GPUs. Ex-isting LLM-based kernel agents are largely CUDA/NVIDIA-centric and often depend on repeated frontier-LLM calls for generation, re-flection, and optimization. To address this gap, we develop HIPKernelGen and TritonKer-nelGen, agent-driven pipelines that transform PyTorch references into HIP or Triton ker-nels, compile and validate candidates under ROCm, and latency-profile them on AMD hard-ware. The corpus contains 62,153 execution-verified HIP kernel samples, 2,377 production-grounded ROCm Libraries QA entries, and 39,893 Triton kernels. We further train Qwen3-8B with supervised fine-tuning and execution-aware reinforcement learning as a demonstra-tion of the corpus’s utility. Under fixed evalua-tion budgets, it achieves the highest correctness among the compared models on PyTorch-to-HIP (34.0% Pass@1), TritonBench-G (33.2% Corr@3), and ROCmBench (41.94% Corr@3), but does not uniformly lead compilation or speed metrics. The corpus and documenta-tion are available at https://huggingface. co/datasets/amd/AIG-Datasets , and the as-sociated training and kernel-generation code is available at https://github.com/AMD-AGI/ hip_kernel_llm_lab .

1 Introduction 

Recent advances in GPU kernel optimization have been driven by LLM-based (Chen et al., 2025; Baronio et al., 2026) and agent-based ap-proaches (Wang et al., 2025a; Dai et al., 2026), together with standardized benchmarks such as Ker-nelBench (Ouyang et al., 2025; Lange et al., 2025b; Heakl et al., 2026). These agent-based systems leverage compiler feedback, runtime correctness checks, and performance profiling to iteratively re-fine generated kernels (Wang et al., 2025a; Chen et al., 2025). However, the data and tooling be-hind these systems remain largely CUDA/NVIDIA-centric. In contrast, AMD’s HIP/ROCm (Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 2025c,a) ecosystem lacks large-scale, execution-verified kernel data for train-ing and evaluating kernel LLMs, especially across both native HIP and Triton backends. This data gap is not a matter of syntax conver-sion alone. Although CUDA and HIP expose sim-ilar programming abstractions, performant AMD kernels depend on ROCm compilation behavior, wavefront execution, LDS usage, memory coa-lescing, matrix-core support, and Triton (Tillet et al., 2019) backend constraints. Direct transla-tion through hipify (Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 2025b) may preserve API structure while re-taining NVIDIA-shaped tiling constants, warp-size assumptions, input-specialized indexing, or mem-ory layouts that fail to compile or underperform on AMD GPUs. Reliable AMD kernel data there-fore requires native compilation, execution-based correctness validation, and latency measurement under ROCm. We present AMDKernelVault , an open, execution-verified HIP and Triton (Tillet et al., 2019) kernel corpus together with scalable agent-based pipelines for AMD GPU kernel data produc-tion. Our pipelines, HIPKernelGen and TritonKer-nelGen, start from PyTorch references and use a generate–evaluate–reflect loop to synthesize candi-date kernels, compile them under ROCm, validate numerical correctness across test inputs, and profile latency on AMD hardware. This process produces 64K+ validated HIP/ROCm data and ∼40K Tri-ton kernels for recent AMD CDNA GPUs, includ-ing benchmark-derived tasks, synthesized operator workloads, and production-grounded supervision from rocBLAS and rocSOLVER .Beyond releasing data, we evaluate whether this corpus can train compact AMD kernel LLMs that reduce reliance on frontier LLMs in agentic opti-1arXiv:2609.12471v1 [cs.CL] 11 Sep 2026 mization systems. Existing kernel-agent workflows often call frontier models repeatedly for generation, reflection, and optimization, which increases cost and limits deployment in private AMD environ-ments. Using AMDKernelVault, we train Qwen3-8B (Yang et al., 2025) with supervised fine-tuning and execution-aware reinforcement learning, then insert the trained model into a GEAK-style (Wang et al., 2025a) agent loop where one local policy serves as generator, reflector, and optimizer. The training recipe is intended as an effectiveness test for the corpus and pipeline rather than a new RL algorithm. Under the same evaluation budget, the trained 8B model achieves the highest correctness among the compared models on PyTorch-to-HIP (34.0% Pass@1) and TritonBench-G (33.2% Corr@3), while running locally on AMD hardware. These results show that execution-verified AMD kernel data can support locally deployable kernel LLMs for ROCm environments. Our primary contribution is the resource and its AMD-native generation and validation infrastructure; the SFT+RL recipe is an effectiveness demonstration rather than a new learn-ing algorithm. Comparisons with frontier mod-els are specific to the reported correctness metrics, benchmarks, and agent budgets. 

Our contributions: 

• AMD-native kernel corpus. We release 64K+ HIP/ROCm and ∼40K Triton data validated through ROCm compilation, execution-based correctness tests, latency profiling, or production-grounded HIP code supervision on recent AMD CDNA GPUs. • Scalable data production pipelines. HIPKer-nelGen and TritonKernelGen provide reusable agent-based generate–evaluate–reflect workflows for producing verified HIP and Triton kernel data from PyTorch references, including benchmark-derived, synthesized, and production-grounded sources. • Compact AMD kernel LLMs. As a corpus-utility demonstration, we train a local Qwen3-8B model to serve the generator, reflector, and op-timizer roles in a GEAK-style loop, improving specific AMD HIP/Triton correctness metrics un-der the same evaluation budget. 

2 Related Work 

GPU Kernel Optimization. GPU kernel op-timization is a longstanding problem in high-performance ML systems (Ragan-Kelley et al., 2013; Chen et al., 2018; Vasilache et al., 2018). Significant efforts have focused on operator fusion, tiling, memory hierarchy optimization, and cus-tom kernel design. Representative systems such as FlashAttention (Dao et al., 2022; Shah et al., 2024) show that carefully designed kernels can provide substantial speedups for modern ML workloads. More recently, automated frameworks have used program analysis, search, and learning-based tech-niques (Zheng et al., 2020) to reduce the manual effort required for kernel tuning. However, most of these methods are developed and evaluated primar-ily on Nvidia GPUs and CUDA backends, leaving AMD-focused kernel optimization comparatively underexplored. 

HIP, Triton, and ROCm. AMD’s HIP pro-vides a CUDA-like programming model within the ROCm software stack (Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 2025c,a), while Triton offers a Python-based DSL for writing custom GPU kernels with explicit control over memory and parallelism (Tillet et al., 2019). Although these abstractions improve porta-bility, AMD execution differs in ROCm compiler behavior, wavefront-level execution, LDS usage, memory coalescing, and backend scheduling con-straints. Source-to-source tools such as hipify can preserve syntax but provide limited guarantees of correctness or performance portability (Advanced Micro Devices, Inc., 2025b). This motivates native HIP/ROCm validation rather than treating AMD support as a post-hoc translation step. 

GPU Kernel Datasets and Benchmarks. High-quality datasets are essential for advancing kernel optimization research. KernelBench (Ouyang et al., 2025) provides standardized environments for gen-erating and evaluating optimized kernels, while other benchmarks cover specific operator fami-lies (Che et al., 2009). However, existing resources remain largely CUDA-centric. CASS (Heakl et al., 2026) facilitates CUDA-to-HIP translation, but does not provide large-scale PyTorch-to-HIP, HIP-to-HIP, or AMD Triton data. Existing Triton bench-marks also primarily target NVIDIA assumptions that may not generalize to ROCm. AMDKernel-Vault addresses this gap by constructing a unified HIP/Triton corpus validated through compilation, 2Figure 1: Unified kernel generation framework. Stage 1 standardizes PyTorch modules into function-style references. Stage 2 synthesizes HIP and Triton kernels using a GEAK-based agentic loop with compilation, correctness validation, and latency-guided optimization. 

execution-based correctness checks, and latency profiling on AMD GPUs. 

LLM-Based Kernel Agents. Recent work ex-plores LLM-based agents for kernel synthesis and optimization (Chen et al., 2025; Baronio et al., 2026; Li et al., 2025b; Wang et al., 2025a). Kevin (Baronio et al., 2026) demonstrates multi-turn RL for CUDA kernels, AutoTriton (Li et al., 2025b) and TritonRL (Woo et al., 2025) study execution-aware training for Triton generation, and GEAK (Wang et al., 2025a) provides an agentic framework for Triton optimization. AVO (Chen et al., 2026) further explores long-horizon au-tonomous kernel evolution on NVIDIA GPUs. AMDKernelVault is complementary: it focuses on execution-verified AMD HIP/ROCm/Triton data and compact local policies for generate–evaluate– reflect loops. Additional discussion is provided in Appendix B. 

3 Agent-Based Dataset Generation 

We present a unified framework for generating execution-verified GPU kernels across both HIP and Triton, using a shared generate–evaluate– reflect paradigm (Figure 1). 

3.1 Unified Pipeline Architecture 

We propose a unified, agent-driven framework for large-scale GPU kernel data construction. The framework follows a shared generate–evaluate– reflect paradigm, enabling systematic synthe-sis, validation, and refinement of GPU kernels grounded in standardized PyTorch references. Within this unified design, we instantiate two con-crete pipelines— HIPKernelGen and TritonKer-nelGen —which specialize the same agent-driven workflow to the HIP and Triton ecosystems respec-tively. 

Stage 1: PyTorch Reference Standardization. 

For each target operator or module kernel, we con-struct a function-style PyTorch reference derived from the PyTorch module input. This represen-tation ensures reliable invocation, consistent in-terface semantics, and execution-based validation across both HIP and Triton backends. When avail-able, compiler-generated kernels (e.g., Torch In-ductor Triton code) are used for cross-checking but do not replace reference-based correctness. 

Stage 2: Backend-Specific Kernel Synthe-sis. Given the standardized PyTorch reference, backend-specific agents generate candidate GPU kernels. Each candidate is subjected to compila-tion, execution-based correctness checks against the PyTorch reference, and latency profiling. The default HIP checker uses torch.allclose with 

rtol=1e-4 , atol=1e-4 , and equal_nan=True .For Triton, task-specific tolerances may be configured from the reference task; otherwise, the fallback is rtol=1e-4 , atol=1e-3 , and 

equal_nan=False . We use no fixed dtype- or operator-specific rule. Failures trigger reflector-guided regeneration until correctness criteria are met or the attempt limit is reached. 

Test-case construction and validation. For PyTorch →HIP and PyTorch →Triton, test 3inputs are inherited from CUDA-Agent-Ops-6K (Dai et al., 2026), GPUMode (Paliskara and Saroufim, 2025) and AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive (Lange et al., 2025a) when available and augmented with verified LLM-generated cases to cover additional shapes, strides, dtypes, and boundary conditions. HIP kernels, including HIP →HIP optimization targets, are bound through 

torch.utils.cpp_extension so that generated kernels can be executed under the same PyTorch reference tests. For Triton →Triton, we extend TritonBench-style tests with ROCm-compatible cases and discard candidates that only pass input-specialized or shape-specialized checks. Thus, LLM-generated tests are not accepted as supervision by themselves; they are used as additional probes inside an execution-based validation loop. 

HIPKernelGen. HIPKernelGen instantiates the unified framework for HIP kernels targeting AMD GPUs. Much of the HIP corpus was generated from August to December 2025 using GPT-5, a strong available kernel-generation model during collection. Each candidate is compiled via hipcc ,validated against PyTorch references, and profiled for latency and speedup. Retention depends on ROCm execution rather than generator identity. 

TritonKernelGen. TritonKernelGen mirrors the HIP pipeline for Triton kernels. We use GPT-oss-120B (Agarwal et al., 2025), DeepSeek-R1 (Guo et al., 2025), and Qwen2.5-32B (Qwen et al., 2025) to diversify implementations and reasoning traces. Each kernel is compiled and executed via Triton 3.3.0 and tested on approximately ten correctness and three performance configurations spanning shapes, strides, FP32/FP16/BF16 where applica-ble, and boundary cases. 

3.2 Source Data 

Our kernel datasets are built upon six complemen-tary sources spanning synthesized CUDA-agent tasks, GitHub-derived PyTorch programs, curated Triton corpora, benchmark-style kernels, and pro-duction ROCm libraries. 

3.2.1 CUDA-Agent-Ops-6K Dataset 

The CUDA-Agent-Ops-6K dataset (Dai et al., 2026) contains 6,000 synthesized operator-level PyTorch tasks for CUDA kernel generation and optimiza-tion. It is built from torch /transformers seed op-erators, LLM-composed multi-operator tasks, and execution-based filtering. We use it as a source for HIP generation, but the original dataset remains CUDA-centric and does not directly support HIP or ROCm. 

3.2.2 GPUMODE-KernelBook Dataset 

The GPUMODE-KernelBook (Paliskara and Saroufim, 2025) dataset contains approximately 18,000 PyTorch modules paired with Torch Induc-tor Triton implementations from GitHub-derived workloads. It provides broad operator coverage across primitives, fused kernels, and larger model components, but remains CUDA/Triton-centric and does not directly provide AMD-validated HIP ker-nels. 

3.2.3 AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive Dataset 

The AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive (Lange et al., 2025a) dataset is built with the AI CUDA Engineer 

framework from over 250 KernelBench PyTorch benchmarks. It provides PyTorch references, gen-erated CUDA kernels, diagnostics, and profiling results, but remains CUDA-centric and does not directly support HIP. 

3.2.4 Stack-v2-dedup-Triton Dataset 

We incorporate the curated Stack-v2-dedup-Triton (Lozhkov et al., 2024) dataset, constructed by filtering approximately 13,000 candidate sam-ples to obtain 2,269 high-quality Triton–PyTorch pairs. This source provides medium-difficulty Tri-ton examples emphasizing correctness and moder-ate complexity. 

3.2.5 TritonBench-8k Dataset 

The TritonBench-8k (Li et al., 2025a) dataset con-sists of samples derived from web crawl data and synthetic code generated via the Ninetoothed DSL (Huang et al., 2025). We apply targeted cu-ration to remove DSL-specific artifacts and ensure correctness across diverse shapes, strides, and pre-cision types. 

3.2.6 ROCm Libraries Dataset Source 

As a production-oriented source, we leverage AMD’s ROCm Libraries monorepo, focusing on 

rocBLAS and rocSOLVER . Unlike benchmark-style datasets, these libraries capture engineering-tested HIP kernels, launch-side logic, and idiomatic pro-duction patterns. 4Dataset Samples           

> HIP/ROCm Datasets
> HIP-CudaAgent 5,388 HIP-GPUMode 22,397 HIP2HIP (Optimization) 34,368 ROCm Libraries QA 2,377
> Total HIP/ROCm 64,530 Triton Datasets
> Triton-Stack 2,269 Triton-Bench (from TritonBench-8k) 7,713 Triton-GPUMode 18,000 Triton-AICE 11,911
> Total Triton 39,893
> Table 1: Summary of the corpus used in this paper. HIP and Triton kernel samples are execution-validated on AMD GPUs; ROCm Libraries QA provides production-grounded supervision.

3.3 Generated Kernel Corpus 

Table 1 summarizes our released corpus. HIP and Triton kernel entries are processed through HIP-KernelGen/TritonKernelGen with execution-based validation on AMD GPUs. The ROCm Libraries QA subset provides complementary production-grounded supervision rather than generated kernel-pair data. 

Counting and audit. The 64,530 HIP/ROCm to-tal comprises 62,153 execution-verified HIP kernel samples and 2,377 ROCm Libraries QA entries. It excludes a separately released 14,282-entry HIP-AICUDA subset that was not used in this paper. HIP-CudaAgent retains 5,388 of 6,000 upstream tasks after excluding 612 incomplete records; HIP-GPUMode contains 5,910 unique tasks and 22,397 kernel variants; and HIP2HIP contains 31,155 single-turn and 3,213 multi-turn records. Triton counts use 39,893 unique source-level samples; packaged reasoning variants may yield a different row count. Since rejection logs were not aggre-gated uniformly across source pipelines, we re-port retained counts and subset-specific validation rather than a single corpus-wide failure rate. 

HIP Datasets. HIP-CudaAgent : Built from 

CUDA-Agent-Ops-6K using HIPKernelGen. We adapt the synthesized PyTorch operator tasks into function-style references and use the generate– evaluate–reflect pipeline to produce HIP implemen-tations. Each candidate is compiled with the ROCm toolchain, checked against the PyTorch reference, and filtered by execution-based correctness valida-tion. This yields 5,388 validated PyTorch-to-HIP samples. 

HIP-GPUMode : Generated from GPUMODE-KernelBook using HIPKernelGen. We first convert PyTorch modules to function-style references, then generate HIP kernels using frontier LLMs. Each candidate undergoes compilation, execution-based validation, and latency profiling. The generate– evaluate–reflect loop iterates until correctness is achieved or a maximum attempt limit is reached. This produces 5,910 unique PyTorch entries with 22,397 HIP kernel variants (avg 3.8 variants/entry). 

HIP2HIP : We extend HIPKernelGen to kernel-to-kernel optimization by operating directly on ex-isting HIP kernel functions or operators. Using HIP-GPUMode as a base, we generate 34,368 vali-dated HIP kernel optimization pairs. 

ROCm Libraries QA. The ROCm Libraries QA subset contains production-grounded interface-level supervision rather than generated kernel-pair data. For each interface in rocBLAS and 

rocSOLVER , we identify kernel-relevant code re-gions and generate QA pairs targeting computation semantics, index-to-tensor mappings, memory ac-cess patterns, synchronization strategies, and edge cases. This yields 1,858 entries from rocBLAS and 519 from rocSOLVER (2,377 total), capturing pro-duction HIP development patterns. 

Triton Datasets. TritonKernelGen processes all Triton sources through a unified validation pipeline, validating numerical correctness across diverse ten-sor shapes, strides, and dtypes (FP32/FP16/BF16) on AMD GPUs. 

Triton-Stack : Curated from Stack-v2-dedup, fil-tering ∼13K candidates to 2,269 medium-difficulty Triton–PyTorch pairs with verified AMD compati-bility, then generated and execution-verified with TritonKernelGen. 

Triton-Bench : Derived from TritonBench-8k, removing DSL-specific artifacts and validating 7,713 samples, generated and execution-verified with TritonKernelGen. 

Triton-GPUMode : Sourced from GPUMODE-KernelBook ( ∼18K entries), with Triton imple-mentations ported from torch-compile kernels to generic kernels able to handle all shapes and params, generated and execution-verified with Tri-tonKernelGen. 

Triton-AICE : From AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive (11,911 samples), converting CUDA-centric Triton to AMD-validated implementations with TritonKernelGen. 5Together, this yields 62,153 validated HIP ker-nel samples and 39,893 validated Triton–PyTorch samples for AMD GPUs, plus 2,377 production-grounded ROCm Libraries QA entries. Additional details on dataset construction, source-specific pro-cessing, metadata, and difficulty distributions are provided in Appendix C and Appendix D. 

3.4 Production-Grounded ROCm QA Supervision 

To extend GPU kernel data construction beyond benchmark-style kernels, we extract HIP-kernel-focused supervision from production-grade ROCm libraries at the interface level. This subset is not treated as direct execution-verified kernel-pair data; instead, it provides production-grounded QA supervision anchored to retrieved rocBLAS and 

rocSOLVER code. 

Interface decomposition. For each target project, we start from a user-facing interface and decompose it into a compact kernel-relevant scope. We traverse the call graph from the interface en-trypoint to identify code regions directly involved in GPU execution, including device-side kernels, host-side launch logic, parameter preparation, and tightly coupled helper utilities. This interface-level view preserves the connection between public APIs and the underlying HIP kernels, which is often lost when treating files or repositories as unstructured text. 

Scope control. Production libraries contain sub-stantial infrastructure code unrelated to kernel be-havior. To avoid recursion blow-up and irrelevant context, we use project-specific allowlists and dis-allowlists. The disallowlist filters logging, debug-ging, testing, and auxiliary utilities, while the al-lowlist constrains traversal to kernel-relevant sub-systems. Because rocBLAS and rocSOLVER differ in organization and dispatch structure, each project uses tailored traversal rules. 

Kernel-centric QA generation. Given the re-trieved interface context, an agent constructs HIP-kernel-focused QA pairs. The questions target con-crete implementation aspects, including computa-tion semantics, index-to-tensor mappings, mem-ory access patterns, synchronization and reduction strategies, launch configuration, and correctness constraints. Answers are grounded in the retrieved code context rather than generic library descrip-tions, so the resulting supervision emphasizes ac-tionable kernel logic. Applying this pipeline yields 519 interface-level entries from rocSOLVER , comprising 226 kernel-implementation-focused samples and 293 kernel-centric QA explanations. From rocBLAS ,we extract 1,858 entries, including 1,169 kernel-implementation samples and 689 QA-style explana-tions. Together, these 2,377 production-grounded entries complement benchmark-derived HIP and Triton datasets with real-world host–device orches-tration and production HIP development patterns. 

3.5 Difficulty Distribution 

We classify samples into three difficulty levels for curriculum training: Level 1 covers standalone single-function kernels, Level 2 covers fused opera-tors or single-file implementations, and Level 3 cov-ers multi-file kernels with cross-module dependen-cies. The full Triton corpus comprises 11,824 L1 (29.6%), 24,765 L2 (62.1%), and 3,304 L3 (8.3%) samples; the curriculum-eligible subset used per Triton RL phase is reported in Appendix G. The ROCm Libraries QA data follows a similar distri-bution: rocSOLVER (190 L1, 198 L2, 131 L3) and 

rocBLAS (971 L1, 506 L2, 381 L3). 

4 Training Compact AMD Kernel LLMs 

AMDKernelVault is designed not only as a kernel corpus, but also as a training resource for compact AMD kernel LLMs. We use it to train Qwen3-8B with a two-stage recipe: supervised fine-tuning (SFT) for cold-start kernel generation, followed by execution-aware reinforcement learning (RL) that uses compilation, correctness, and latency feed-back. 

4.1 Kernel Tasks and Metrics 

Our datasets support four kernel-centric tasks: 

PyTorch →HIP translates PyTorch modules into semantically equivalent HIP implementations; 

HIP →HIP optimizes existing HIP kernels; 

Text →Triton generates Triton kernels from natural-language specifications; and Triton →Triton 

improves Triton kernels through tiling, memory-access, and boundary-handling changes. We evaluate kernels with three execution-based metrics: compilation pass , successful build under the target toolchain; correctness pass , numerical equivalence against the PyTorch reference; and 

speed , kernel-level speedup over the input kernel or PyTorch baseline. Comp@ k and Corr@ k report 6compilation and correctness after k agent iterations, while Pass@ k measures the probability of obtain-ing at least one correct result from k samples. For PyTorch-to-Triton, speedup is measured against the original PyTorch implementation; for Triton-to-Triton, it is measured against the input kernel. Speed@10 averages the speedups of the best ten correct samples. 

4.2 Supervised Fine-Tuning 

Direct RL from a pretrained model is difficult in this domain because early rollouts often fail to com-pile or violate kernel interfaces, producing sparse feedback. We therefore first apply SFT to teach ker-nel syntax, binding conventions, memory-access idioms, and common implementation patterns. For HIP, we use instruction–response pairs from the HIP portions of AMDKernelVault, where the input is a PyTorch task or source HIP kernel and the output is a validated HIP implementation. For Tri-ton, we use reasoning-augmented examples when available, so that the model learns to plan tiling, masking, boundary checks, and memory layouts before emitting code. This stage provides the cold-start capability needed for subsequent execution-aware RL. 

4.3 Execution-Aware Reinforcement Learning 

After SFT, we optimize the model using execution feedback. HIP training uses single-turn GRPO, where each candidate is compiled, tested, and scored after one generation attempt. Triton training uses a multi-turn variant aligned with the GEAK-style generate–evaluate–reflect loop: the model proposes a kernel, observes compiler or runtime feedback, reflects on the failure or performance bottleneck, and generates an improved candidate. The reward combines three signals: compila-tion, correctness, and speedup. Compilation credit provides partial feedback for syntactically and interface-compatible kernels, correctness rewards functional equivalence, and a bounded speedup term encourages performance improvements with-out allowing timing outliers to dominate learning. This reward is designed for the low-success regime of AMD kernel generation, where binary correct-ness rewards alone provide too little gradient signal. Full reward definitions and GRPO details are pro-vided in Appendix E. 

4.4 Agentic Integration 

A key goal is to test whether the corpus can train a compact local model for an agentic kernel opti-mization loop. We train one Qwen3-8B policy to serve the generator, reflector, and optimizer roles. During multi-turn Triton RL, the same model pro-duces a candidate, interprets execution feedback, and emits the next revision. This training recipe is not presented as a new RL algorithm. Rather, it evaluates whether execution-verified AMDKernelVault data can specialize a compact policy for AMD kernel agents. Section 5 therefore reports controlled, metric-specific com-parisons under identical agent budgets. 

4.5 Training Configuration 

We train Qwen3-8B with SFT followed by RL on AMD MI-series GPUs. HIP training uses SFT fol-lowed by single-turn GRPO, while Triton training uses SFT followed by multi-turn on-policy reflec-tion RL with curriculum scheduling. We keep the main text focused on the training recipe used to evaluate AMDKernelVault as a corpus for compact AMD kernel LLMs. Appendix E provides task serialization, SFT and GRPO objectives, reward implementation, curriculum schedule, hyperparam-eters, and additional analysis of reward sensitivity. 

5 Experiments 

We evaluate whether AMDKernelVault can train compact AMD kernel LLMs that improve HIP and Triton kernel generation under execution-based val-idation. We compare Qwen3-8B trained on our cor-pus against frontier LLMs (GPT-5, Gemini 2.5 Pro, Claude Sonnet 4). For HIP, we evaluate PyTorch-to-HIP translation on 200 KernelBench Level-1/2 tasks (Ouyang et al., 2025) and HIP-to-HIP op-timization on 100 held-out samples. For Triton, we use TritonBench-G (184 kernels) and ROCm-Bench (31 AMD-specific kernels) with the same 3-iteration OptimAgent-v2 protocol (Wang et al., 2025b). Each model serves as generator, reflector, and optimizer under identical agent settings, and all reported Triton inference runs use MI355X GPUs. 

Train/test separation and overlap controls. 

Evaluation cases are excluded from training by source and task identifier. HIP evaluation uses 200 held-out KernelBench-derived translation tasks and 100 held-out HIP-to-HIP optimization tasks; Triton evaluation uses the curated 184-kernel TritonBench-G and 31-kernel ROCmBench sets. 7These controls prevent exact task-identifier reuse. However, because generated kernels can implement semantically similar operator patterns using dif-ferent code, exact-match filtering cannot exclude every functional near-duplicate. We did not con-duct an exhaustive corpus-wide semantic-overlap search and therefore interpret the reported results as benchmark-specific rather than as evidence of overlap-free generalization. 

Evaluation protocol and metrics. All Triton model comparisons use the same OptimAgent-v2 configuration: num_offsprings=1 ,

max_iteration=3 , identical generator/re-flector/optimizer role assignment, and no profiler feedback. Thus, each row changes the model checkpoint while holding the external agent scaffold and execution budget fixed. Comp@ k

and Corr@ k report the fractions of tasks that compile and pass numerical validation by iteration 

k, respectively; Pass@ k reports the probability of obtaining at least one correct result from k indepen-dently sampled candidates. For PyTorch-to-kernel generation, speedup is measured against the Py-Torch reference; for kernel-to-kernel optimization, it is measured against the input kernel. Speed comparisons include only correctness-passing candidates. 

Benchmark coverage. The evaluation covers attention and softmax variants, layer and RMS normalization, GEMM-family operations, elemen-twise transformations, reductions, fused blocks, MoE-style routing, and online-softmax-style fused reductions. KernelBench Level-1/2 tests emphasize operator implementation and composition, while TritonBench-G spans difficulty levels from stan-dalone operators to harder fused kernels; ROCm-Bench adds AMD-specific cases. This breadth tests multiple common deep-learning kernel patterns, but it is not a per-family performance study: the benchmark sizes are limited, and we do not report operator-family-specific pass rates. 

Triton reproducibility setup. Triton workflows use Triton 3.3.0. Corpus validation and profiling use MI325 and MI350 GPUs; Triton SFT and RL use 32 MI325X GPUs; and reported Triton inference uses MI355X GPUs. The corpus tar-gets gfx942 for MI325X stages and gfx950 for MI350/MI355X stages. ROCm, PyTorch, and Python versions vary across data-production snap-shots and are not pinned to one release. Warm-up 

Model Comp Acc Corr Acc 

Gemini 2.5 Pro 70.5% 18.5% Claude Sonnet 4 85.0% 22.0% GPT-5 75.5% 24.0% Q3-8B (base) 50.0% 14.5% Q3-8B + SFT 78.0% 31.5% 

Q3-8B + SFT + RL 83.5% 34.0%                      

> Table 2: Pass@1 results of PyTorch-to-HIP translation (200 tasks from KernelBench Levels 1 and 2). Q3-8B denotes Qwen3-8B.
> Model Comp Acc Corr Acc Speed@10
> Gemini 2.5 Pro 81% 69% 1.15 ×
> Claude Sonnet 4 93% 67% 1.11 ×
> GPT-5 89% 87% 1.32 ×
> Q3-8B (base) 26% 18% 1.02 ×
> Q3-8B + SFT 86% 70% 1.06 ×
> Q3-8B + SFT + RL 90% 84% 1.14 ×
> Table 3: Pass@1 results of HIP-to-HIP kernel optimiza-tion (100 held-out modules). Q3-8B denotes Qwen3-8B and speed@10 denotes average speedup achieved over baseline of best 10 correct samples.

and measurement use 25 ms and 100 ms time bud-gets, respectively, with per-kernel iteration counts derived from a short timing estimate. We report median GPU-event timing, flush L2 before each measured call, synchronize after the measured loop, and discard no timing observations. 

5.1 HIP Kernel Results 

Table 2 evaluates PyTorch-to-HIP translation. Fron-tier LLMs compile many candidates but achieve limited correctness; GPT-5 reaches 75.5% com-pilation but only 24.0% correctness. Training on AMDKernelVault substantially improves Qwen3-8B: SFT raises correctness to 31.5%, and RL fur-ther improves it to 34.0%, outperforming all fron-tier baselines in correctness. Table 3 evaluates HIP-to-HIP optimization. The trained model reaches 84% correctness, close to GPT-5 (87%) and substantially above the base model (18%), while maintaining positive speedup. These results indicate that the HIP portion of AMD-KernelVault supports both translation and optimiza-tion tasks. 

5.2 Triton Kernel Results 

Table 4 reports TritonBench-G results under the fixed 3-iteration GEAK OptimAgent-v2 evaluator. The base Qwen3-8B model reaches 4.9% Corr@3, 8while SFT improves to 10.3% and SFT+RL reaches 33.2%, compared with GPT-5 at 15.2% and Claude Sonnet 4 at 29.8%. Since all rows use the same scaffold and budget, this controlled comparison demonstrates the corpus’s utility for specializing a compact local model.                             

> Model Corr@1 Corr@3 Comp@3 Speed
> Gemini 2.5 Pro 8.7% 23.4% 32.6% 1.31 ×
> Claude Sonnet 4 7.6% 29.8% 46.7% 1.34 ×
> GPT-5 3.8% 15.2% 28.8% 1.05 ×
> Q3-8B (base) 0.0% 4.9% 14.7% 0.97 ×
> Q3-8B + SFT 4.3% 10.3% 27.7% 1.19 ×
> Q3-8B + SFT + RL 12.0% 33.2% 67.9% 1.46 ×

Table 4: TritonBench-G results under the fixed 3-iteration GEAK OptimAgent-v2 evaluator. All models use the same agent budget and role assignment; only the LLM checkpoint changes. Corr/Comp denote correct-ness/compile accuracy, and Q3-8B denotes Qwen3-8B. 

Table 5 shows results on ROCmBench. The trained Qwen3-8B model obtains the highest Corr@3 (41.94%), compared with Claude Sonnet 4 (35.48%) and GPT-5 (29.03%). Claude Sonnet 4 remains stronger on Comp@3 (67.74% versus 58.06%) and speed (1.82 × versus 1.61 ×), so the advantage is specific to correctness. 

Difficulty Analysis. Our model leads the com-pared frontier baselines on D1–D3 of TritonBench-G, but Claude Sonnet 4 solves more D4 kernels (18/84 versus 13/84), and D5 remains unsolved by all models. Full results are provided in Ap-pendix K. 

Limitations and Failure Analysis. Despite strong results on D1–D3 tasks, expert-level ker-nels remain challenging. Common failure modes include incorrect tile/block size choices for unusual tensor shapes, synchronization errors in multi-stage reductions, and memory-coalescing failures under AMD’s wavefront execution model. These failures suggest that future work should incorporate richer profiler-guided feedback and broader expert-kernel supervision. 

5.3 Ablation Studies 

We conduct ablations to assess the importance of data scale, SFT cold start, and multi-turn RL. Per-formance improves with more training data, SFT provides a critical initialization before RL, and multi-turn RL contributes +13.1% on Triton. De-tailed ablation tables and reward-sensitivity results are provided in Appendix J.                         

> Model Corr@1 Corr@3 Comp@3 Speed
> Gemini 2.5 Pro 12.90% 25.81% 41.94% 1.47 ×
> Claude Sonnet 4 19.35% 35.48% 67.74% 1.82 ×
> GPT-5 16.13% 29.03% 35.48% 1.31 ×
> Q3-8B (base) 3.22% 6.45% 19.35% 0.74 ×
> Q3-8B + SFT + RL 22.58% 41.94% 58.06% 1.61 ×

Table 5: ROCmBench (AMD) results under the fixed 3-iteration GEAK OptimAgent-v2 evaluator. All rows use the same agent budget, and Q3-8B denotes Qwen3-8B. 

6 Conclusion 

AMDKernelVault is an open HIP and Triton ker-nel resource for recent AMD CDNA GPUs, sup-ported by AMD-native generation and validation infrastructure. As a utility demonstration, we spe-cialize Qwen3-8B for a GEAK-style loop; under fixed budgets, it achieves the highest correctness on selected benchmarks but does not uniformly lead compilation or speed. We release the corpus, docu-mentation, and code to support future AMD kernel research. 

Limitations 

Our evaluation is limited to AMD GPU environ-ments and kernel-generation benchmarks available to us. Expert-level kernels remain difficult across all tested models, and the reported performance de-pends on the specific ROCm, Triton, and hardware configurations used during validation. Although we include production-derived ROCm library su-pervision, some generated kernels may still inherit suboptimal structures from upstream CUDA/Triton sources or from LLM-generated candidates. Several gaps remain for future work: broader corpus-level profiling of latency, memory footprint, register pressure, and occupancy; per-operator-family pass-rate analysis beyond the current dif-ficulty breakdown; larger held-out HIP evaluation sets; and evaluation beyond deep-learning work-loads, including HPC, sparse/graph, and database kernels. Future work should also incorporate richer profiler-guided feedback and broader expert-kernel supervision. We do not report a corpus-wide semantic near-duplicate audit or uniformly aggregated candidate-rejection rates because source pipelines use differ-ent logging formats. Software environments also vary across data-production snapshots, although Triton is fixed to version 3.3.0 for the reported Tri-ton workflow. 9Ethical Considerations and Impact Statement 

This work focuses on GPU kernel generation and optimization for AMD hardware. The released ar-tifacts consist of program code, generated kernels, execution metadata, and QA supervision grounded in public ROCm library code. Provenance, us-age conditions, and per-source license notes are included with the public artifact. The expected positive impact is improved effi-ciency for AI workloads. Faster generated kernels can reduce training and inference runtime, while a compact local model can reduce repeated frontier-LLM calls during kernel search. These improve-ments may lower computational cost and energy use for AMD GPU deployments. As with other code-generation systems, gener-ated code may be incorrect, inefficient, or unsafe if deployed without validation. We mitigate this risk by emphasizing execution-based compilation, correctness testing, and latency profiling through-out data construction and evaluation. The work is narrowly focused on performance engineering for GPU kernels, and generated kernels should be vali-dated in the target environment before production use. 

References 

Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2025a. HIP documen-tation (programming guide). https://rocm.docs. amd.com/projects/HIP/en/latest/ . Accessed 2025-12-15. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2025b. HIPIFY documentation. https://rocm.docs.amd.com/ projects/HIPIFY/en/latest/ . Accessed 2025-12-15. Advanced Micro Devices, Inc. 2025c. ROCm documen-tation. https://rocm.docs.amd.com/ . Accessed 2025-12-15. Sandhini Agarwal, Lama Ahmad, Jason Ai, Sam Alt-man, Andy Applebaum, Edwin Arbus, Rahul K Arora, Yu Bai, Bowen Baker, Haiming Bao, et al. 2025. gpt-oss-120b & gpt-oss-20b model card. arXiv preprint arXiv:2508.10925 .Carlo Baronio, Pietro Marsella, Ben Pan, Simon Guo, and Silas Alberti. 2026. Kevin: Multi-turn rl for generating cuda kernels. In International Conference on Learning Representations .Shuai Che, Michael Boyer, Jiayuan Meng, David Tar-jan, Jeremy W. Sheaffer, Sang-Ha Lee, and Kevin Skadron. 2009. Rodinia: A benchmark suite for heterogeneous computing. In IEEE International Symposium on Workload Characterization (IISWC) ,pages 44–54. Terry Chen, Zhifan Ye, Bing Xu, Zihao Ye, Timmy Liu, Ali Hassani, Tianqi Chen, Andrew Kerr, Haicheng Wu, Yang Xu, Yu-Jung Chen, Hanfeng Chen, Aditya Kane, Ronny Krashinsky, Ming-Yu Liu, Vinod Grover, Luis Ceze, Roger Bringmann, John Tran, and 4 others. 2026. AVO: Agentic variation opera-tors for autonomous evolutionary search. Preprint ,arXiv:2603.24517. Tianqi Chen, Thierry Moreau, Ziheng Jiang, Lianmin Zheng, Eddie Yan, Haichen Shen, Meghan Cowan, Leyuan Wang, Yuwei Hu, Luis Ceze, Carlos Guestrin, and Arvind Krishnamurthy. 2018. TVM: An auto-mated end-to-end optimizing compiler for deep learn-ing. In 13th USENIX Symposium on Operating Sys-tems Design and Implementation (OSDI 18) , pages 578–594. Wentao Chen, Jiace Zhu, Qi Fan, Yehan Ma, and An Zou. 2025. Cuda-llm: Llms can write efficient cuda kernels. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.09092 .Weinan Dai, Hanlin Wu, Qiying Yu, Huan-ang Gao, Jiahao Li, Chengquan Jiang, Weiqiang Lou, Yufan Song, Hongli Yu, Jiaze Chen, et al. 2026. Cuda agent: Large-scale agentic rl for high-performance cuda ker-nel generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2602.24286 .Tri Dao, Dan Fu, Stefano Ermon, Atri Rudra, and Christopher Ré. 2022. Flashattention: Fast and memory-efficient exact attention with io-awareness. 

Advances in neural information processing systems ,35:16344–16359. Daya Guo, Dejian Yang, Haowei Zhang, Junxiao Song, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Ruoyu Zhang, Shirong Ma, Xiao Bi, et al. 2025. Deepseek-r1: In-centivizing reasoning capability in llms via reinforce-ment learning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12948 .Ahmed Heakl, Gustavo Bertolo Stahl, Sarim Hashmi, Seung Hun Eddie Han, Mukul Ranjan, Arina Khar-lamova, Salman Khan, and Abdulrahman Mahmoud. 2026. Cass: Nvidia to amd transpilation with data, models, and benchmark. In Proceedings of the 64th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics (Volume 1: Long Papers) , pages 34489– 34508. Jiacheng Huang, Zimin Li, Yinghui Li, and Haojie Wang. 2025. Ninetoothed: A triton-based high-level domain-specific language for machine learning. 

Preprint , arXiv:2507.11978. Robert Tjarko Lange, Aaditya Prasad, Qi Sun, Maxence Faldor, Yujin Tang, and David Ha. 2025a. The AI CUDA Engineer Archive: Agentic CUDA kernel dis-covery, optimization and composition. Hugging Face dataset, https://huggingface.co/datasets/ SakanaAI/AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive . Ac-cessed: 2026-08-30. 

10 Robert Tjarko Lange, Qi Sun, Aaditya Prasad, Maxence Faldor, Yujin Tang, and David Ha. 2025b. Towards robust agentic cuda kernel benchmarking, verifica-tion, and optimization. Preprint , arXiv:2509.14279. Jianling Li, Shangzhan Li, Zhenye Gao, Qi Shi, Yuxuan Li, Zefan Wang, Jiacheng Huang, Haojie Wang, Jian-rong Wang, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025a. Tritonbench: Benchmarking large language model capabilities for generating triton operators. In 

Findings of the Association for Computational Lin-guistics: ACL 2025 , pages 23053–23066, Vienna, Austria. Association for Computational Linguistics. Shangzhan Li, Zefan Wang, Ye He, Yuxuan Li, Qi Shi, Jianling Li, Yonggang Hu, Wanxiang Che, Xu Han, Zhiyuan Liu, and Maosong Sun. 2025b. Autotriton: Automatic triton programming with reinforcement learning in llms. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.05687 .Anton Lozhkov, Raymond Li, Loubna Ben Allal, Fed-erico Cassano, Joel Lamy-Poirier, Nouamane Tazi, Ao Tang, Dmytro Pykhtar, Jiawei Liu, Yuxiang Wei, et al. 2024. Starcoder 2 and the stack v2: The next generation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.19173 .Anne Ouyang, Simon Guo, Simran Arora, Alex L Zhang, William Hu, Christopher Re, and Azalia Mirhoseini. 2025. KernelBench: Can LLMs write efficient GPU kernels? In Proceedings of the 42nd International Conference on Machine Learning , vol-ume 267 of Proceedings of Machine Learning Re-search , pages 47356–47415. PMLR. Sahan Paliskara and Mark Saroufim. 2025. Kernelbook. Qwen, An Yang, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chengyuan Li, Dayiheng Liu, Fei Huang, Haoran Wei, Huan Lin, Jian Yang, Jianhong Tu, Jianwei Zhang, Jianxin Yang, Jiaxi Yang, Jingren Zhou, Junyang Lin, and 24 others. 2025. Qwen2.5 technical report. Preprint ,arXiv:2412.15115. Jonathan Ragan-Kelley, Connelly Barnes, Andrew Adams, Sylvain Paris, Frédo Durand, and Saman Amarasinghe. 2013. Halide: A language and com-piler for optimizing parallelism, locality, and recom-putation in image processing pipelines. In Proceed-ings of the 34th ACM SIGPLAN Conference on Pro-gramming Language Design and Implementation (PLDI) , pages 519–530. Jay Shah, Ganesh Bikshandi, Ying Zhang, Vijay Thakkar, Pradeep Ramani, and Tri Dao. 2024. Flashattention-3: Fast and accurate attention with asynchrony and low-precision. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems , 37:68658–68685. Zhihong Shao, Peiyi Wang, Qihao Zhu, Runxin Xu, Junxiao Song, Xiao Bi, Haowei Zhang, Mingchuan Zhang, Y. K. Li, Y. Wu, and Daya Guo. 2024. Deepseekmath: Pushing the limits of mathemati-cal reasoning in open language models. Preprint ,arXiv:2402.03300. Philippe Tillet, H. T. Kung, and David Cox. 2019. Tri-ton: An intermediate language and compiler for tiled neural network computations. In Proceedings of the 3rd ACM SIGPLAN International Workshop on Ma-chine Learning and Programming Languages (MAPL ’19) , pages 10–19. Nicolas Vasilache, Oleksandr Zinenko, Theodoros Theodoridis, Priya Goyal, Zachary DeVito, William S. Moses, Sven Verdoolaege, Andrew Adams, and Albert Cohen. 2018. Tensor compre-hensions: Framework-agnostic high-performance machine learning abstractions. CoRR .Jianghui Wang, Vinay Joshi, Saptarshi Majumder, Xu Chao, Bin Ding, Ziqiong Liu, Pratik Prabhan-jan Brahma, Dong Li, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Bar-soum. 2025a. Geak: Introducing triton kernel ai agent & evaluation benchmarks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.23194 .Jianghui Wang, Saptarshi Majumder, Umang Pandey, Chao Xu, Bin Ding, Manoj Rao, Ziqiong Liu, Pratik Prabhanjan Brahma, Dong Li, Zicheng Liu, and Emad Barsoum. 2025b. GEAK-Triton v2 Family of AI Agents: Kernel Optimization for AMD Instinct GPUs. AMD ROCm Blogs. Accessed: 2026-01-27. Jiin Woo, Shaowei Zhu, Allen Nie, Zhen Jia, Yida Wang, and Youngsuk Park. 2025. TritonRL: Training LLMs to think and code triton without cheating. Preprint ,arXiv:2510.17891. An Yang, Anfeng Li, Baosong Yang, Beichen Zhang, Binyuan Hui, Bo Zheng, Bowen Yu, Chang Gao, Chengen Huang, Chenxu Lv, et al. 2025. Qwen3 technical report. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.09388 .Lianmin Zheng et al. 2020. Ansor: Generating high-performance tensor programs for deep learning. In 

14th USENIX Symposium on Operating Systems De-sign and Implementation (OSDI 20) .

11 A Artifact, License, and AI-Assistance Statement 

Artifacts and licenses. The data and documenta-tion are available at https://huggingface. co/datasets/amd/AIG-Datasets . The associated training, RL, and HIP kernel-generation code is available at https: //github.com/AMD-AGI/hip_kernel_llm_lab .The release includes corpus-audit, validation-protocol, and license/provenance documentation. Upstream resources remain subject to their source-specific terms: CUDA-Agent-Ops-6K and AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive are released under CC-BY-4.0; the current GPUMODE/KernelBook release uses the June 9 Researcher Reciprocity Li-cense; TritonBench-8k uses Apache-2.0; and Stack v2 retains the BigCode and original-repository terms. ROCm Libraries are licensed per compo-nent; the source components used here include rocBLAS under the MIT License and rocSOLVER under the BSD-2-Clause License. The ROCm Libraries QA subset contains interface-level supervision and provenance references rather than a redistribution of the complete source trees. Exact source revisions and applicable terms are documented in the released provenance metadata. 

Data content and filtering. The released data consists of program code, kernel implementations, task metadata, execution logs, and interface-level QA supervision grounded in public ROCm library code. It is not intended to contain personally iden-tifying information or offensive content, and the data construction pipeline filters generated artifacts for executability, determinism, and task validity. Generated kernels are filtered through compilation, execution-based correctness checks, and ROCm validation; QA entries are grounded in retrieved public code contexts rather than user data. 

AI assistance. We used AI assistants during this project for two purposes. First, frontier LLMs such as GPT-5 were used inside HIPKernelGen/Tri-tonKernelGen to generate candidate GPU kernels and reflection feedback, which were then com-piled, tested, profiled, and filtered by the authors’ execution-based pipeline. Second, general AI writ-ing assistants were used to help polish wording and organize the manuscript. All experimental de-sign, dataset filtering, validation, analysis, and final claims were checked and approved by the authors. 

B More Related Work 

Production Library Code as Supervision. 

Benchmark-derived datasets provide diversity but are typically limited to standalone kernels. In con-trast, production library code from projects such as 

rocBLAS and rocSOLVER captures interface-level implementations spanning multiple files and reflect-ing production-grade engineering practices. These libraries encode years of architecture-specific op-timization and correctness engineering. AMD-KernelVault incorporates this signal through an interface-aware extraction pipeline that produces kernel-centric supervision grounded in real HIP code. 

Positioning Relative to Multi-Turn RL Ker-nel Agents. Prior multi-turn systems, including Kevin (Baronio et al., 2026), demonstrate that iter-ative execution feedback can improve kernel gen-eration. We do not claim that multi-turn feedback alone is new. Our setting differs in two ways. First, AMD HIP/Triton generation starts from a lower-success regime, where early compilation and cor-rectness rewards are sparse. Second, our goal is to train a model that can be deployed inside an agent-training framework, rather than only evalu-ate an external LLM called by an agent wrapper. In GEAK-style workflows, repeated LLM calls normally handle generation, reflection, and opti-mization. We instead train one compact policy on execution-feedback trajectories so that the same model can serve these roles locally under ROCm. 

On Comparing to Kevin and Devin-Class Agents. Kevin is trained to emit raw CUDA via torch.utils.cpp_extension.load_inline 

on NVIDIA hardware, using CUDA-specific primitives such as __shfl_xor_sync and 

__shared__ memory. Our evaluation targets AMD GPUs through HIP/ROCm and TritonBench-G/ROCmBench under ROCm. A same-protocol comparison would require Kevin to emit AMD-compatible Triton or HIP kernels, which it was not trained for. We therefore treat Kevin as evidence that RL on execution feedback is effective in CUDA settings, while focusing our empirical comparison on models evaluated under the same GEAK OptimAgent-v2 protocol. Devin is a hosted coding agent without a benchmark-accessible interface exposing the fixed generator/reflector/op-timizer role assignment used here, so we do not include it as a direct baseline. 12 System Target Training Multi-turn feedback Performance signal Role internalization              

> Kevin CUDA / KernelBench Multi-turn RL Yes Correctness + speedup Kernel refinement, not AMD/GEAK roles AutoTriton Triton SFT + GRPO/RLVR No explicit multi-role loop Rule + execution rewards No generator/reflec-tor/optimizer loop GEAK AMD Triton No model training Inference-time only Correctness + latency Separate frontier-LLM calls
> AMDKernelVault AMD HIP/Triton SFT + execution-aware RL Yes Compile + correctness + speedup One 8B policy for all LLM roles
> References: Kevin (Baronio et al., 2026); AutoTriton (Li et al., 2025b); GEAK (Wang et al., 2025a).

Table 6: Positioning relative to closely related kernel-generation systems. 

C Dataset Details 

C.1 HIP Kernel Datasets C.1.1 HIP-CudaAgent Dataset 

The HIP-CudaAgent Dataset is derived from 

CUDA-Agent-Ops-6K using the HIPKernelGen pipeline: 1. PyTorch Task Normalization. The synthe-sized operator-level PyTorch tasks are converted into function-style references with input construc-tion and correctness-checking logic. 2. HIP Kernel Generation. An LLM-based generator produces HIP implementations for each normalized PyTorch task. Each candidate is com-piled with the ROCm toolchain and validated against the PyTorch reference through execution-based tests. 3. Iterative Refinement. Compilation errors, runtime failures, and numerical mismatches trigger reflector-guided regeneration until correctness is achieved or the maximum attempt limit is reached. Final: 5,388 validated PyTorch-to-HIP samples. 

C.1.2 HIP-GPUMode Dataset 

The HIP-GPUMode Dataset is generated from the GPUMODE-KernelBook dataset using the HIPKer-nelGen pipeline: 1. PyTorch Module to Function Conver-sion. The first-stage agent converts PyTorch module-level code into function-style PyTorch code with correctness-checking logic to filter functionally equivalent pairs. 2. HIP Kernel Generation. The second-stage agent translates each PyTorch module into HIP code using an LLM-based genera-tor. Each candidate undergoes compilation, execution-based correctness validation, and latency measurements. 3. Iterative Refinement. Failed kernels trig-ger reflector-guided feedback for iterative re-generation until valid or maximum attempts reached. Final: 5,910 unique PyTorch modules with 

22,397 HIP kernel optimization variants (avg 3.8 variants/entry). 

C.1.3 HIP-to-HIP Optimization Pairs 

We extend HIPKernelGen to support kernel-level HIP-to-HIP optimization by operating directly on existing HIP kernel functions annotated with 

__global__ or __device__ . The input is a base-line HIP kernel and the output is an optimized kernel with equivalent semantics. Final: 34,368 

validated HIP kernel optimization pairs. 

C.2 Triton Kernel Dataset 

We construct a large-scale Triton kernel dataset us-ing TritonKernelGen, aggregating multiple comple-mentary sources under a unified validation pipeline. 

C.2.1 Stack-v2-dedup (curated) 

We filter and extract PyTorch code containing 

torch operators and/or Torch Inductor constructs, wrap entries into function-style references, and validate against a high-coverage test suite. From 

∼13,000 candidates, we obtain 2,269 medium-difficulty, functionally correct Triton–PyTorch pairs. 

C.2.2 TritonBench-train (modified) 

We curate 7,713 samples from the original TritonBench-8k. Synthetic kernels generated via the ninetoothed DSL are refined or discarded to 13 remove DSL-specific artifacts and input-specific patterns. We expand test coverage to ensure gen-eralization across shapes, strides, and precision types. 

C.2.3 GPUMODE-KernelBook 

We incorporate ∼18,000 PyTorch entries with Tri-ton code extracted via Torch Inductor, using them as a primary source for operator coverage and struc-tural guidance. 

C.2.4 AI-CUDA-Engineer-Archive 

We leverage 11,911 usable PyTorch + CUDA pairs. Where Triton code is absent, the agent synthesizes Triton implementations against the shared PyTorch reference and expanded test suite. 

Summary. Across sources, TritonKernelGen ag-gregates 39,893 validated samples. Available meta-data varies by source subset and packaged represen-tation; where present, it records construction-time validation outcomes, latency, and precision/shape coverage. 

C.3 ROCm Libraries QA Dataset 

Interface-level extraction from AMD ROCm Li-braries using depth-first call graph traversal: • rocSOLVER : 519 entries (226 kernel implemen-tations, 293 QA explanations). Difficulty: 190 L1, 198 L2, 131 L3. • rocBLAS : 1,858 entries (1,169 implementations, 689 QA explanations). Difficulty: 971 L1, 506 L2, 381 L3. Total: 2,377 production-grounded supervision entries capturing production HIP development patterns, interface-driven kernel logic, and host– device orchestration. 

C.4 Difficulty Distribution 

Table 7 shows the full difficulty statistics used to support the curriculum discussion in Section 3. Level 1 contains standalone kernels with relatively direct data flow, Level 2 covers fused or single-file implementations requiring coordinated memory ac-cess, and Level 3 includes multi-file or interface-level code with cross-module dependencies. The Triton corpus is dominated by Level 2 examples, while the ROCm Libraries QA subset contains a larger fraction of Level 3 entries because produc-tion interfaces often involve host-side orchestration and multi-file kernel dispatch. 

D Dataset Analysis 

This section analyzes the resulting datasets in terms of scale, operator coverage, diversity, and architecture-relevant properties. 

D.1 Dataset Summary 

Table 1 summarizes the scale and composition of AMDKernelVault. The corpus contains 64K+ HIP/ROCm supervision entries and approximately 40K Triton kernels, spanning PyTorch-to-kernel generation, kernel-to-kernel optimization, and production-grounded code understanding. The HIP/ROCm portion combines HIP-CudaAgent and HIP-GPUMode for PyTorch-to-HIP generation, HIP2HIP for optimizing existing HIP kernels, and ROCm Libraries QA for interface-grounded super-vision from rocBLAS and rocSOLVER. The Triton portion aggregates four comple-mentary sources into the Triton-Curated corpus: curated web/code examples from Triton-Stack, benchmark-derived kernels from Triton-Bench, Torch-Inductor-derived programs from Triton-GPUMode, and AI-CUDA-Engineer-derived tasks from Triton-AICE. Together, these subsets provide broad AMD-validated coverage across generated operator workloads, benchmark-style kernels, and production-grounded HIP/Triton programming pat-terns. 

D.2 Operator and Workload Coverage 

Across both HIP and Triton datasets, kernels span common deep learning operator families, including elementwise transforms, reductions, normalization layers (e.g., layer normalization), matrix and ten-sor transformations, and composite fusion patterns produced by Torch Inductor. Because workloads are derived from real Py-Torch programs and benchmark suites, kernels re-flect practical memory access patterns, shape vari-ability, and fusion structures encountered in train-ing and inference workloads, rather than synthetic microkernels. The ROCm Libraries QA dataset extends cover-age to production-grade linear algebra primitives from rocBLAS (e.g., GEMM, TRSM, SYMM) and rocSOLVER (e.g., QR factorization, eigen-solvers), providing supervision grounded in multi-file, interface-driven kernel implementations. 14 Level Triton rocBLAS rocSOLVER          

> Level 1 (Standalone) 11,824 (29.6%) 971 190 Level 2 (Fused/single-file) 24,765 (62.1%) 506 198 Level 3 (Multi-file) 3,304 (8.3%) 381 131
> Table 7: Difficulty distribution across datasets.

D.3 Kernel Diversity and Optimization Variants 

The datasets exhibit substantial diversity in valid kernel implementations for the same functional operators. In HIP-GPUMode, multiple HIP kernels are provided per PyTorch entry, differing in block sizes, thread mapping strategies, tiling schemes, memory access orderings, and reduction structures. Similarly, Triton-Curated contains multiple ker-nel realizations for overlapping operators, captur-ing variation in program structure, scheduling deci-sions, and memory layouts at the DSL level. This diversity exposes non-trivial performance trade-offs and supports studies in kernel ranking, selec-tion, and agent-driven optimization. Such multiplicity of correct implementations is essential for learning-based systems that aim to reason over optimization spaces rather than merely reproducing reference kernels. 

D.4 Data Quality and Bias Mitigation 

Because a large fraction of the corpus is produced by automated agents, we explicitly filter for execu-tion quality rather than trusting raw model outputs. Candidates must compile, pass reference-based tests, and satisfy ROCm execution constraints be-fore entering the released set. For performance-oriented subsets, multiple candidates are generated and the retained variants are selected after latency measurement on AMD hardware. Public expert-level HIP kernels are scarce, so the corpus com-bines production kernels from ROCm Libraries with rigorously filtered generated variants. This de-sign removes obviously poor kernels while preserv-ing multiple correct implementations when they expose different optimization strategies. We also mitigate NVIDIA-centric bias in four ways. First, CUDA-derived samples are treated as seeds, not final AMD supervision: they are trans-lated, compiled, and filtered under ROCm. Sec-ond, generated HIP variants are re-optimized and measured on AMD hardware rather than accepted solely for syntactic portability. Third, ROCm Li-braries provide expert-written HIP examples from 

rocBLAS and rocSOLVER , anchoring the dataset in production AMD code. Fourth, Triton sam-ples are refactored and tested for shape generality, stride awareness, and AMD-compatible schedul-ing assumptions. These checks reduce reliance on NVIDIA-specific warp-size, tensor-core, and tiling assumptions while still preserving useful algorith-mic structure from upstream corpora. 

D.5 Portability and Correctness Outcomes 

All released HIP kernels compile and pass execution-based correctness checks on AMD ROCm after filtering. Triton-Curated kernels like-wise compile and pass correctness validation on AMD GPUs under expanded test suites covering diverse shapes, strides, and precision modes. Because upstream corpora differ substantially in portability, Portability filtering removes kernels that rely on non-general indexing, device-specific assumptions, or input-specialized schedules. As a result, the released datasets represent AMD-valid kernel implementations rather than raw collections from heterogeneous sources. 

D.6 Validation Metadata 

Validation metadata is subset-dependent. Where available, packaged records include source iden-tifiers, task or reference information, dtype/shape coverage, compiler or runtime status, latency, and speedup relative to the relevant baseline. Some packaged verification fields are empty even when construction-time validation was performed, and rejected-candidate logs were not retained uni-formly across pipelines. For ROCm Libraries QA, available provenance can include source paths and interface-level context. We therefore do not claim that every released record contains all fields needed to reconstruct the complete validation trajectory. 

D.7 Architecture-Relevant Properties (Triton) 

To assess whether Triton-Curated reduces common vendor-shaped artifacts present in upstream cor-pora, we analyze kernel parameterization and code-shape properties that often encode device-specific 15 assumptions, such as distributions of num_warps ,

num_stages , and block-size choices. Compared to raw crawled or DSL-generated Triton code, Triton-Curated exhibits greater di-versity in scheduling parameters and fewer hard-coded constants tied to specific hardware config-urations. This reflects both execution-based filter-ing on AMD and agent-driven refactoring toward stride-aware and shape-general indexing, which are required for correctness across ROCm backends. During generation and validation, prompts and feedback expose AMD-specific constraints such as wavefront behavior, LDS capacity, compute-unit occupancy, and target architectures including gfx942 and gfx950. 

D.8 Comparison with Existing GPU Kernel Datasets 

Existing kernel datasets and benchmarks primar-ily target CUDA or Nvidia-backed Triton execu-tion, limiting their applicability to ROCm-based platforms. In contrast, HIP-CudaAgent and HIP-GPUMode provide native HIP kernels that exe-cute on AMD GPUs, while Triton-Curated supplies an AMD-validated Triton corpus aligned with the same PyTorch references. This enables systematic research on AMD-focused kernel optimization, cross-platform tran-spilation, and heterogeneous GPU performance modeling that is difficult to conduct using Nvidia-centric benchmarks alone. 

D.9 Implications for Learning-Based Kernel Research 

By combining real-world workload coverage, ver-ified executability on AMD GPUs, and diverse optimization variants across both HIP and Triton representations, the released datasets support su-pervised fine-tuning, reinforcement learning, and agent-based kernel synthesis under realistic hard-ware constraints. These properties enable research on performance-aware kernel generation, auto-matic optimization strategies, and cross-abstraction learning, substantially lowering the barrier to data-driven GPU systems research on AMD platforms. 

E More Details of Compact LLM Training 

This appendix provides implementation details for the training recipe summarized in Section 4. 

E.1 Task Serialization and SFT Objective 

Each training instance is serialized as an instruction–response pair. The instruction contains the task specification, such as PyTorch reference code, a natural-language Triton prompt, or an in-put HIP/Triton kernel. The response contains the target kernel implementation, optionally preceded by reasoning annotations for Triton examples. SFT optimizes the standard next-token likeli-hood: 

LSFT (θ) = −E(x,y ∗) [log πθ(y∗ | x)] , (1) where x is the task specification and y∗ is the target implementation. For HIP, training examples use direct instruction– response formatting without additional reasoning augmentation. For Triton, when available, we in-clude Chain-of-Thought-style planning before the final kernel: 

y∗ = [ reasoning , kernel ].

This helps the model learn tiling choices, mask-ing logic, memory-access patterns, and boundary handling. All SFT runs use full-parameter fine-tuning rather than PEFT/LoRA; in preliminary ex-periments, parameter-efficient adapters underper-formed for this setting because the model has to learn both low-level kernel syntax and agentic self-reflection behavior, and the coupled generation and debugging skills required broader updates than adapter-only training provided. 

E.2 Reward Design 

Execution-aware RL uses a hierarchical reward: 

r = rcompile + rcorrect + rperf , (2) where 

rcompile = 0 .4, rcorrect = 1 .0, rperf ≤ 1.5.

The compilation reward is assigned when the can-didate builds successfully under the target back-end. The correctness reward is assigned when the candidate passes numerical validation against the PyTorch reference. The performance reward is de-fined as 

rperf = min  0.375 · (log 2 s)2, 1.5 , (3) for speedup s ≥ 1.16 This design gives partial credit to near-valid ker-nels that compile but fail correctness, which is im-portant in the low-success regime of kernel RL. The bounded performance term rewards meaning-ful speedups while reducing sensitivity to noisy latency measurements, JIT effects, or autotuning outliers. Typical fast-converging speedups during RL sit well below the 1.5 cap, so this cap func-tions as a conservative stability guard rather than a tuned hyperparameter; the reward-sensitivity analy-sis (Appendix J, Table 13) confirms low sensitivity to the exact cap value. 

E.3 GRPO Optimization 

We use Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) for execution-aware RL (Shao et al., 2024). Standard GRPO normalizes advantages by reward variance: 

ˆAi = ri − ¯rσr + ϵ .

In our setting, many early groups contain uniformly failed samples or samples with very similar partial rewards. We therefore disable variance normaliza-tion and use: 

ˆAi = ri − ¯r. (4) The policy update follows PPO-style clipping: 

L(θ) = −E

h

min 



ρt ˆAt, clip( ρt, 1 ± ϵ) ˆAt

i 

+βD KL .

(5) 

E.4 Multi-Turn On-Policy Reflection 

For Triton, each rollout follows a multi-turn generate–evaluate–reflect process. At turn t, the policy observes the task prompt, previous candi-date code, compiler output, correctness failures, and optional latency feedback. It then emits both a reflection and a revised kernel. The multi-turn return is: 

G(τ ) = 

> T

X

> t=1

γt−1rt, (6) with γ = 0 .6 and T = 3 .Because the same policy produces both reflec-tion and code, the model learns feedback interpre-tations that are actionable for its own generation behavior. This aligns training with deployment in GEAK-style agent loops, where the trained model serves as generator, reflector, and optimizer. 

E.5 Curriculum and Hyperparameters 

HIP training uses SFT followed by single-turn GRPO. Triton training uses SFT followed by multi-turn GRPO with on-policy reflection and curricu-lum scheduling. The Triton curriculum gradually shifts from easier kernels to harder samples, reduc-ing the fraction of Level-1 examples while increas-ing Level-2 and Level-3 tasks. We train Qwen3-8B-Instruct with the following configuration: • HIP SFT: 8 ×MI250, 4 epochs. • HIP RL: 8 ×MI325X, 2 epochs, batch size 12, 6 rollouts. • Triton SFT: 32 ×MI325X, 2 epochs. • Triton RL: multi-turn GRPO, 2.7 epochs, 3 turns. 

E.6 Reward Sensitivity and Design Rationale 

Binary correctness rewards are insufficient in early AMD kernel RL because most candidates fail to compile or fail numerical validation. Under such sparse feedback, many GRPO groups produce zero or near-zero useful advantage. The compile reward increases the fraction of samples with usable sig-nal, while disabled variance normalization prevents small reward differences from being amplified or collapsed by unstable group statistics. Ablations in Appendix J and Table 13 evalu-ate these choices. Removing multi-turn reflection, removing SFT cold start, or weakening the hier-archical reward reduces performance, confirming that execution-aware training is important for turn-ing AMDKernelVault into an effective training re-source for compact AMD kernel LLMs. 

F Evaluation Details 

Benchmark scope. Our execution-intensive eval-uation uses 200 PyTorch-to-HIP tasks, 100 HIP-to-HIP optimization tasks, 184 TritonBench-G ker-nels, and 31 ROCmBench kernels. These sets re-quire compilation and on-device validation and are suitable for controlled comparisons, but they do not establish performance over every AMD operator or workload family. 

Agent-budget sensitivity. Our main results use a fixed 3-iteration budget. On TritonBench-G, Q3-8B+SFT+RL improves from 12.0% Corr@1 to 33.2% Corr@3, compared with 7.6% to 29.8% for Claude Sonnet 4 and 3.8% to 15.2% for GPT-5. On ROCmBench, it improves from 22.58% to 41.94%, 17 compared with Claude Sonnet 4 from 19.35% to 35.48%. 

G Training Details 

G.1 Hyperparameters                                                       

> Parameter HIP Triton
> Model
> Base model Qwen3-8B-Instruct Sequence length 8K 16K
> SFT
> Hardware 8×MI250 32 ×MI325X Learning rate 2×10 −51×10 −5
> Batch size 8/GPU 8/GPU Epochs 42Framework LLaMA-Factory LLaMA-Factory
> RL: GRPO / Multi-Turn GRPO
> Hardware 8×MI325X 32 ×MI325X Learning rate 1×10 −61×10 −6
> Batch size 12 64 prompts Group size G68Clip ϵ0.2 0.2 / 0.28 KL coefficient β0.01 0.01 Framework VeRL SLIME Epochs 22.7
> Multi-Turn (Triton only)
> Turns T–3Discount γ–0.6
> Reward
> Compile partial –0.4 Correct –1.0 Performance cap –1.5

Table 8: Complete hyperparameter configuration. 

G.2 Implementation Components 

Our implementation separates training, execu-tion feedback, and benchmark scoring into mod-ular components. The multi-turn RL trainer fol-lows a SLIME-style rollout loop: prompts are sampled from the kernel task dataset, the pol-icy generates candidate code and reflections for up to T = 3 turns, and GRPO updates the same policy using the hierarchical rewards de-scribed in Section 4. Reward-standard-deviation normalization is disabled to preserve stable ad-vantages in the sparse-reward regime. A sepa-rate execution server compiles candidates, runs correctness tests, and measures latency, return-ing compiler/runtime traces and performance feed-back to the rollout loop. Final benchmark scor-ing uses TritonBench-G and ROCmBench, while the headline Triton results use the fixed agent-training evaluator (GEAK OptimAgent-v2) with 

num_offsprings=1 , max_iteration=3 , and no profiler feedback. 

G.3 Curriculum Learning Phases (Triton) 

For Triton RL training, we employ difficulty fading across three phases:           

> Phase Composition Samples
> 1L1 only (Easy) 5.3K 2L1 subset + L2 + L3 med 16.5K 3L2 subset + L3 + variants 4K

Table 9: Curriculum phases for Triton RL training. 

Unlike cumulative curricula that add harder sam-ples while keeping all easy samples, difficulty fad-ing progressively reduces easy samples to focus training on harder cases. This approach prevents the model from overfitting to easy examples while ensuring sufficient exposure to challenging multi-file and fused kernel implementations. 

H Training Dynamics 

Figure 2 presents the training dynamics for our multi-turn on-policy reflection RL on Triton ker-nel generation. The reward trajectory (a) shows steady improvement from the SFT baseline ( ∼0.19) to peak values above 1.0, demonstrating effective learning from execution feedback. The benchmark evaluation (b) tracks performance on TritonBench-G (compilation and correctness accuracy) and ROCmBench throughout training, showing con-sistent gains across both benchmarks. 

I Additional Experimental Analysis 

Cost and deployability. A practical advantage of training one compact policy is that the GEAK-style loop can run locally on AMD GPUs. Frontier-LLM-based pipelines require repeated external calls for generation, reflection, and optimization, introducing API cost, latency variance, and deploy-ment constraints. In contrast, our trained Qwen3-8B model runs within the local AMD environment and serves all three roles in the agent loop. 

Cross-hardware transfer. To test whether learned optimizations overfit to one AMD target, we evaluate HIP kernels optimized on MI325 GPUs on MI250 GPUs. The optimized kernels retain sub-stantial gains, reaching Speed@10 of 1.68 × on MI250. Triton evaluations on MI325 and MI350 show similar qualitative trends, suggesting that the 18 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700        

> Training Step
> 0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0 1.2
> Reward
> (a) Training Reward
> Training Reward SFT Baseline
> 0100 200 300 400 500 600 700
> Training Step
> 0510 15 20 25 30 35 40 45
> Accuracy (%)
> (b) Evaluation During Training
> ROCmBench(AMD) (n=20)
> TritonBench-G Call (n=120) TritonBench-G Exec (n=120) TritonBench-G Pass@2

Figure 2: RL training results for Triton kernel generation. (a) Reward trajectory showing improvement from SFT baseline ( ∼0.19) to peak values above 1.0. (b) Benchmark evaluation during training. 

model learns transferable optimization principles such as locality, tiling, and parallel reduction pat-terns while still benefiting from ROCm-specific validation. 

Additional failure modes. Beyond D5 expert-level failures, we observe three common categories of errors: shape-specialized indexing that fails on broader test cases, numerically unstable reduc-tions, and inefficient memory layouts inherited from CUDA/NVIDIA-centric assumptions. These findings motivate future extensions with profiler-guided training feedback and additional production AMD kernels. 

J Ablation Studies 

We conduct comprehensive ablation studies to vali-date our design choices across both HIP and Triton training pipelines. 

J.1 Data Scale (HIP) 

Table 10 evaluates the impact of training data scale on PyTorch-to-HIP translation (200 tasks from Ker-nelBench Levels 1 and 2). 

Data Rate Comp Acc Corr Acc 

0% (base) 50.0% 14.5% 10% 62.5% 17.5% 30% 64.5% 18.0% 50% 69.5% 23.0% 100% 83.5% 34.0% 

Table 10: Impact of training data scale on PyTorch-to-HIP translation. 

With only 10% of training data, the model achieves 62.5% compilation and 17.5% cor-rectness—already surpassing the base model (50.0%/14.5%). Performance scales consistently, confirming our dataset provides high-quality, di-verse supervision. 

J.2 Triton RL Components 

Table 11 presents ablations on the Triton training framework, evaluated using the agent-training eval-uator (GEAK OptimAgent-v2) with 3 iterations on TritonBench-G (184 kernels). 

Configuration Corr Acc ∆

Full system 33.2% –Single-turn ( T = 1 ) 20.1% -13.1 No SFT cold start 8.5% -24.7 

Table 11: Ablation studies on Triton generation. 

Key findings: • Multi-turn is essential (+13.1%): Single-turn generation cannot recover from initial failures, while 3-turn reflection enables progressive refine-ment. The model learns to identify errors from execution feedback and generate targeted fixes. • SFT cold start is critical (+24.7%): Without SFT initialization, the base model’s low initial success rate ( ∼15%) produces extremely sparse RL gradients. SFT raises this to ∼51%, enabling effective RL optimization. 

J.3 Fixed Agent Scaffold Ablation 

Table 12 isolates the effect of the model train-ing stage under a fixed agent-training evaluator. All rows use the same GEAK OptimAgent-v2 loop on TritonBench-G with num_offsprings=1 ,

max_iteration=3 , no profiler feedback, and iden-tical generator/reflector/optimizer role assignment; 19 only the model checkpoint changes. The large gain from base Q3-8B to Q3-8B+SFT+Agentic RL shows that the external agent scaffold alone is insufficient: the policy must be trained on agent feedback trajectories to use compiler, correctness, and performance feedback effectively.     

> Model inside agent evaluator Training signal Corr@3
> Q3-8B (base) None / role-agnostic base model 4.9% Q3-8B + SFT Supervised kernel data 10.3% Q3-8B + SFT + Agentic RL Multi-turn compiler/test/perf feedback
> 33.2%
> Table 12: Effect of agentic training under a fixed agent scaffold. All rows use the same GEAK OptimAgent-v2 loop; only the model checkpoint changes.

J.4 Reward Sensitivity 

We further analyze the components of the hierar-chical reward used during Triton RL. The domi-nant sensitivity is not the absolute reward scale but whether the reward creates usable gradient signal in the low-success regime. These observations motivate the chosen re-ward in Eq. 2: partial compilation credit pro-vides early learning signal, disabled normalization prevents variance collapse or explosion, and the bounded log-squared performance term rewards real speedups without letting measurement jitter dominate correctness. 

K Extended Results 

K.1 Pass@K Analysis (Parallel Scaling) 

Table 14 presents pass@k results on ROCmBench (31 Triton kernels), measuring the probability of generating at least one correct kernel within k sam-ples. Our model achieves the highest pass@k across all values, with pass@5 reaching 41.94% compared to 38.71% for Claude Sonnet 4. 

K.2 Full Difficulty Breakdown 

Table 15 provides the complete difficulty-wise breakdown including all model variants, showing the progression from base model through SFT to RL. 

K.3 Training Progression 

The progression from Base (4.9%) to SFT (10.3%) to RL (33.2%) demonstrates the effectiveness of each training stage: • Base → SFT : +5.4% (2.1 ×) — learns kernel syntax and patterns • SFT → RL : +22.9% (3.2 ×) — learns from exe-cution feedback 

L Theoretical Analysis 

L.1 Zero-Advantage Collapse in GRPO 

Standard GRPO uses binary rewards (correct/in-correct) with group-normalized advantages. We first prove why this leads to frequent zero-gradient updates, then explain how our design avoids this failure mode. 

L.1.1 Binary Reward Collapse (Motivation) Theorem 1 (Binary Reward Collapse) . In stan-dard GRPO with group size G and binary rewards 

r ∈ { 0, 1}, let pe denote the probability that a single sample succeeds (receives reward 1). The probability that all samples in a group receive iden-tical rewards, yielding zero advantages, is: 

P ( ˆAi = 0 , ∀i) = pGe + (1 − pe)G (7) 

Proof. In standard GRPO, the advantage for sam-ple i is: 

ˆAi = ri − ¯rσr + ϵ (8) where ¯r = 1

> G

PGj=1 rj is the group mean and σr is the group standard deviation. For binary rewards ri ∈ { 0, 1}, the advantage 

ˆAi = 0 for all i if and only if all samples receive the same reward: • If all ri = 0 : then ¯r = 0 , so ri − ¯r = 0 for all 

i

• If all ri = 1 : then ¯r = 1 , so ri − ¯r = 0 for all 

i

Since samples are drawn independently: 

P (all fail ) = (1 − pe)G (9) 

P (all pass ) = pGe (10) 

P (zero advantage ) = pGe + (1 − pe)G (11) 

Corollary 1 (Collapse Rate with Binary Rewards) .

For typical kernel generation with ∼6% initial suc-cess rate ( pe = 0 .06 ) and group size G = 8 :

P (zero advantage ) = (0 .06) 8 + (0 .94) 8 (12) 

≈ 0 + 0 .606 = 60 .6% (13) 20 Factor Sensitivity Observed effect                  

> Compile partial credit High Raises usable gradient mass from near-zero to ∼44% Disable σ-normalization Critical Avoids advantage collapse (Adv. ≈0.5vs. ∼10 −8)Credit value 0.2 vs. 0.4 Low–medium Both learn; 0.4 gives denser early compile signal Performance cap Low Stabilizes late training against noisy >15 ×speedups

Table 13: Qualitative sensitivity of reward design choices in sparse Triton RL.                          

> Model pass@1 pass@2 pass@3 pass@4 pass@5 Ours 27.10% 35.16% 38.71% 40.65% 41.94%
> Claude Sonnet 4 25.81% 33.87% 36.77% 38.06% 38.71% GPT-5 20.65% 28.39% 31.29% 32.26% 32.26% Gemini 2.5 Pro 17.42% 24.84% 29.03% 32.26% 35.48%

Table 14: Pass@K results on ROCmBench (31 kernels, 5 samples each with temp=1.0) 

Over 60% of training batches produce zero gradi-ents—the model cannot learn. 

L.1.2 Our Solution: Hierarchical Rewards + Disabled Normalization 

To avoid binary-reward collapse, we combine two mechanisms: 

1. Hierarchical Rewards. Instead of binary r ∈{0, 1}, we use: 

r = rcompile 

| {z } 

> 0.4

+ rcorrect 

| {z } 

> 1.0

+ rperf 

|{z} 

> ≤1.5

∈ [0 , 2.9] (14) This creates intermediate reward levels : a sam-ple that compiles but fails correctness receives 

r = 0 .4, distinguishing it from complete failures (r = 0 ). This makes identical rewards across a group less likely. 

2. Disabled σ-Normalization. Even with hi-erarchical rewards, early training can exhibit re-ward clustering (e.g., most samples get r = 0 or 

r = 0 .4). When σr is small but non-zero, the stan-dard normalization ˆAi = ( ri − ¯r)/σ r amplifies small differences into large, unstable gradients. During training, we observed training collapse due to these unstable gradients when using standard normalization. Disabling normalization entirely resolved this: 

ˆAi = ri − ¯r (15) The combination ensures: (1) hierarchical re-wards create variance by distinguishing partial suc-cesses, and (2) disabled normalization keeps gradi-ents stable when that variance is small. 

Curriculum-Induced Clustering. During cur-riculum training, batches contain samples of sim-ilar difficulty (e.g., all L1-Easy). Even success-ful samples receive similar rewards ( ≈1.4), caus-ing σr ≈ 0. Disabled normalization handles this gracefully—any differential progress (one sample achieving performance bonus while others don’t) produces non-zero gradients. 

L.2 On-Policy Reflection 

At each turn, the policy conditions on the prompt, prior code and reflections, and the compiler or exe-cution feedback returned by the environment. The same parameters generate subsequent revisions and are updated from the resulting trajectory return. We use this standard on-policy construction as an im-plementation choice; we do not claim a new policy-gradient result. 

L.3 Multi-Turn Credit Assignment Lemma 1 (Temporal Credit with γ < 1). For dis-count factor γ = 0 .6 and T = 3 turns, the effective contribution weights are: 

w1 = 1 .0 (Turn 1) (16) 

w2 = 0 .6 (Turn 2) (17) 

w3 = 0 .36 (Turn 3) (18) 

After normalization, this assigns approximately 51.0% of the weight to Turn 1, encouraging the model to succeed early while still rewarding im-provement through reflection. 

M Multi-Turn Self-Correction Examples 

We present abridged pseudocode examples illus-trating self-correction on medium-to-hard diffi-culty kernels. Ellipses and shortened fragments 21 1 2 3 4 5

k (number of samples) 

> 010 20 30 40
> Pass@k (%)
> 41.9%

Pass@K on ROCmBench (n=31 kernels) 

> Qwen3-8B + RL (Ours) Claude Sonnet 4 GPT-5 Gemini 2.5 Pro

Figure 3: Pass@K comparison on ROCmBench (31 kernels). Our model achieves the highest pass rate at all k

values, demonstrating superior sample efficiency for kernel generation. 

Difficulty Claude GPT-5 Gemini Base SFT Ours 

D1 (Easy, 3) 1/3 0/3 2/3 2/3 3/3 3/3 

D2 (Med, 27) 12/27 7/27 9/27 7/27 10/27 17/27 

D3 (Hard, 65) 24/65 16/65 21/65 0/65 6/65 28/65 

D4 (V.Hard, 84) 18/84 5/84 11/84 0/84 0/84 13/84 D5 (Expert, 5) 0/5 0/5 0/5 0/5 0/5 0/5 

Total 55 28 43 9 19 61 

Table 15: Complete difficulty-wise results (exec-correct kernels at final iteration). Base = Qwen3-8B, SFT = Cold-Start SFT, Ours = SFT → Multi-Turn RL. 

omit boilerplate and therefore are not standalone executable listings. 

M.1 Example 1: Cross-Attention (Medium-Hard) Task: Implement cross-attention softmax kernel for RGB-Depth fusion. 

Concepts: Multi-head attention, softmax fusion, batched matrix operations, numerical stability. 

Turn 1 (Compile= ✓, Exec= ✗, Reward=0.4): Missing numerical stability (max subtraction): 

> @triton.jit def softmax_kernel(input_ptr, output_ptr, n_rows, n_cols, BLOCK_SIZE: tl.constexpr): row_idx = tl.program_id(0) col_offsets = tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE) vals = tl.load(input_ptr + row_idx * n_cols + col_offsets) # BUG: No numerical stability - causes overflow! output = tl.exp(vals) / tl.sum(tl.exp(vals)) tl.store(output_ptr + row_idx * n_cols + col_offsets, output)

Feedback: “NaN values in output. Softmax requires numerical stability: subtract max before exp() to prevent overflow.” 

Turn 2 (Compile= ✓, Exec= ✓, Reward=1.87, Speedup=2.17 ×): Correct numerically stable soft-max: 

> @triton.jit def softmax_kernel(input_ptr, output_ptr, n_rows, n_cols, input_row_stride, BLOCK_SIZE: tl.constexpr): row_idx = tl.program_id(0) row_start = input_ptr + row_idx * input_row_stride col_offsets = tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE) mask = col_offsets < n_cols vals = tl.load(row_start + col_offsets, mask=mask, other=-inf) # FIXED: Numerical stability row_max = tl.max(vals, axis=0) vals_shifted = vals - row_max numerator = tl.exp(vals_shifted) output = numerator / tl.sum(numerator, axis=0) tl.store(output_ptr + row_idx * n_cols + col_offsets, output, mask=mask)

Recovery: Immediate (1 turn). Final speedup: 

2.17 ×.

M.2 Example 2: PreNorm Transformer Decoder (Hard) Task: Implement Triton-optimized Pre-Norm Transformer Decoder Layer. 

Concepts: Fused layer normalization, multi-head attention, cross-attention, FFN, residual con-22 nections. 

Turn 1 (Compile= ✗, Exec= ✗, Reward=0.0): In-correct kernel structure for layer norm: 

@triton.jit def layer_norm_kernel(x_ptr, weight_ptr, output_ptr, M, N): # BUG: Missing eps, wrong reduction, no bias row = tl.program_id(0) mean = tl.sum(tl.load(x_ptr + row * N)) / N # Wrong load! var = tl.sum((x - mean) ** 2) / N output = (x - mean) / tl.sqrt(var) # Missing eps! 

Feedback: “Compilation failed: undefined ’x’. Also: missing eps causes division by zero, missing bias parameter.” 

Turn 2 (Compile= ✓, Exec= ✗, Reward=0.4): Fixed syntax but wrong reduction for large N: 

@triton.jit def layer_norm_kernel(x_ptr, weight_ptr, bias_ptr, output_ptr, M, N, eps: tl.constexpr, BLOCK_SIZE: tl. constexpr): row = tl.program_id(0) cols = tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE) # BUG: Only handles N <= BLOCK_SIZE x = tl.load(x_ptr + row * N + cols, mask=cols < N) mean = tl.sum(x) / N var = tl.sum((x - mean) ** 2) / N ... 

Feedback: “Incorrect output for N >BLOCK_SIZE. Use multi-pass reduction for large feature dimensions.” 

Turn 3 (Compile= ✓, Exec= ✓, Reward=2.9, Speedup=9.13 ×): Correct multi-pass layer norm: 

@triton.jit def layer_norm_kernel(x_ptr, weight_ptr, bias_ptr, output_ptr, M, N, eps: tl.constexpr, BLOCK_SIZE: tl. constexpr): row = tl.program_id(0) # FIXED: Multi-pass for arbitrary N mean = 0.0 for off in range(0, N, BLOCK_SIZE): cols = off + tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE) mask = cols < N x = tl.load(x_ptr + row * N + cols, mask=mask, other =0.0) mean += tl.sum(x, axis=0) mean = mean / N # Similar multi-pass for variance... 

Recovery: Progressive (2 turns). Final speedup: 

9.13 ×.

M.3 Example 3: Bound Softmax Multi-Pass (Medium) Task: Implement numerically stable softmax for sequences longer than block size. 

Concepts: 3-pass algorithm (max, exp+sum, normalize), arbitrary sequence length handling. 

Turn 1 (Compile= ✓, Exec= ✗, Reward=0.4): Single-pass fails for long sequences: 

@triton.jit def softmax_kernel(input_ptr, output_ptr, n_rows, n_cols, BLOCK_SIZE: tl.constexpr): row_idx = tl.program_id(0) # BUG: Assumes n_cols <= BLOCK_SIZE cols = tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE) 

Kernel Diff. T1 T2 T3 Speedup 

Cross-Attn. Softmax Med.-Hard ✗ ✓ ✓ 2.17 ×

PreNorm Trans. Hard ✗ ✗ ✓ 9.13 ×

Bound Softmax Medium ✗ ✓ ✓ 5.18 ×

Fused Upsample Hard ✗ ✗ ✓ 6.79 ×

Weight Proc. Hard ✗ ✗ ✓ 4.22 ×

Table 16: Multi-turn recovery on medium-to-hard ker-nels with final speedups. ✓ = compile and execution pass; ✗ = fail. 

vals = tl.load(input_ptr + row_idx * n_cols + cols) max_val = tl.max(vals) # Only partial max! exp_vals = tl.exp(vals - max_val) output = exp_vals / tl.sum(exp_vals) 

Feedback: “Incorrect softmax for n_cols=2048 > BLOCK_SIZE=1024. Partial max causes incor-rect normalization.” 

Turn 2 (Compile= ✓, Exec= ✓, Reward=2.9, Speedup=5.18 ×): Correct 3-pass algorithm: 

@triton.jit def bound_softmax_kernel(input_ptr, output_ptr, n_rows, n_cols, BLOCK_SIZE: tl.constexpr): row_idx = tl.program_id(0) row_start = input_ptr + row_idx * n_cols # PASS 1: Find global maximum max_val = float('-inf') for col_off in range(0, n_cols, BLOCK_SIZE): cols = col_off + tl.arange(0, BLOCK_SIZE) mask = cols < n_cols vals = tl.load(row_start + cols, mask=mask, other= float('-inf')) max_val = tl.maximum(max_val, tl.max(vals, axis=0)) # PASS 2: Compute exp(x-max) and sum sum_val = 0.0 for col_off in range(0, n_cols, BLOCK_SIZE): ... # Store intermediate, accumulate sum # PASS 3: Normalize by sum for col_off in range(0, n_cols, BLOCK_SIZE): ... # Divide by sum_val 

Recovery: Immediate (1 turn). Final speedup: 

5.18 ×.

M.4 Summary: Recovery Statistics 

These examples demonstrate that RL training en-ables emergent debugging capabilities on com-plex GPU kernels: the model learns to handle multi-pass reductions, numerical stability, arbitrary tensor dimensions, and fused operations—patterns that re-quire deep understanding of GPU programming paradigms. 

M.5 Kernel Quality Analysis 

Across the five medium-to-hard case studies sum-marized above, the agent-trained model produces correct kernels with speedups of 2.17 ×, 9.13 ×,

5.18 ×, 6.79 ×, and 4.22 × over the PyTorch refer-ence (geometric mean ≈ 4.94 ×, median 5.18 ×). Two qualitative observations emerge from inspect-23 ing the generated code. First, the optimizations are not generic templates: the model selects different strategies per workload (multi-pass safe softmax for long sequences, fused layer-norm with running statistics for the Pre-Norm decoder, masked tile loads with ‘tl.exp‘ numerical stabilization for cross-attention). Second, when a turn fails, the next-turn revision typically targets the exact error class in the feedback (e.g., adding numerical stabilization after a NaN report, switching from single-pass to multi-pass reduction after an out-of-bounds error). This pattern is consistent with the multi-turn agent train-ing objective: the same policy must produce both the failure analysis and the corresponding code edit, so reflections are tied to actionable revisions rather than generic suggestions. We also note what these examples do not show. They are not microbenchmarks tuned for a sin-gle shape; each case is validated across mul-tiple shape/stride/dtype combinations under the same test harness used during training, so the re-ported speedups reflect the realistic correctness-and-performance trade-off our pipeline filters for. A larger-scale latency distribution and memory-consumption study across the full corpus is left for future work and is explicitly listed in our limita-tions. 24